infovis-1995-01	Visualization for Functional Design. We present two novel visualisation tools: the Influence Explorer and the Prosection Matrix. These were specifically created to support engineering artifact design and similar tasks in which a set of parameter values must be chosen to lead to acceptable artifact performance. These tools combine two concepts. One is the interactive and virtually immediate responsive display of data in a manner conducive to the acquisition of insight. The other, involving the precalculation of samples of artifact performance, facilitates smooth exploration and optimisation leading to a design decision. The anticipated benefits of these visualisation tools are illustrated by an example taken from electronic circuit design, in which full account must be taken of the uncertainties in parameter values arising from inevitable variations in the manufacturing process.
infovis-1995-02	Towards a Generative Theory of Diagram Design. We describe the theoretical background for AVE, an automatic visualization engine for semantic networks. We have a functional notion of aesthetics and therefore understand meaningfulness as a central issue for information visualization. This implies that the diagrams should communicate the characteristics of the data as effectively as possible. In this generative theory of diagram design, we include data characterization, systematic use of graphical means of expression and the combination of graphical means of expression. After giving a brief introduction and an application scenario we discuss these aspects in detail. Finally, a process model of an automatic visualization process is sketched and directions for further research are outlined.
infovis-1995-03	Research report: information animation applications in the capital markets. 3D computer graphics can be extremely expressive. It is possible to display an entire securities market, like the S&P 500, on a single screen. With the correct approach to the visual design of the layout, these massive amounts of information can be quickly and easily comprehended by a human observer. By using motion and animated interaction, it is possible to use 3D as a reliable, accurate and precise decision-support tool. Information animation applications are particularly suited to the securities industry because that is where we find huge amounts of data, the value of which declines rapidly with time, and where critical decisions are being made on this data in very short periods of time. Information animation technology is an important new tool for the securities industry, where people need to be in the decision-making loop without suffering from information overload. Several examples are discussed including equity trading analytics, fixed income trading analytics and fixed-income risk viewing.
infovis-1995-04	Research report: improving browsing in information by the automatic display layout. It is well known that graphical representations could be very helpful to browse in graph structured information. But this promising approach requires the capability of an automatic layout system because the tedious and time consuming task of a manual layout leads to a rejection of this approach by the user. In our approach, we split the task of retrieving information into two phases that are getting the orientation within the network and reading currently visited information. We present layout algorithms for both phases which have the benefit of being flexible and adaptable to individual user requests and ensure the topological consistency, i.e. the stability of the topology of the information layout during a sequence of display layouts. The results show that especially the possibility of an animation of the layout process can assist the user essentially in maintaining the orientation in the information network.
infovis-1995-05	SDM: Malleable Information Graphics. Selective dynamic manipulation (SDM) is a paradigm for interacting with objects in visualizations. Its methods offer a high degree of selectivity, in choosing object sets, in the selection of interactive techniques and the properties they affect, and in the degree to which a user action affects the visualization. Our goal is to provide a flexible set of techniques and feedback mechanisms that enable users to move objects and transform their appearance to perform a variety of information analysis tasks.
infovis-1995-06	The Information Mural: A Technique for Displaying and Navigating Large Information Spaces. Visualizations which depict entire information spaces provide context for navigation and browsing tasks; however, the limited size of the display screen makes creating effective global views difficult. We have developed a technique for displaying and navigating large information spaces. The key concept is the use of an information mural, a two-dimensional reduced representation of an entire information space that fits completely within a display window or screen. Information murals use grayscale shading and color along with anti-aliasing techniques to create a miniature version of the entire data set. By incorporating navigational capabilities, information murals become a tool that can be used as a global view along with more detailed informational displays. Information murals are utilized in our software visualization research to help depict the execution of object-oriented programs, and can also be used in more general information visualization applications.
infovis-1995-07	Visualizing the Non-Visual: Spatial Analysis and Interaction with Information from Text Documents. This paper describes an approach to IV that involves spatializing text content for enhanced visual browsing and analysis. The application arena is large text document corpora such as digital libraries, regulations and procedures, archived reports, etc. The basic idea is that text content from these sources may be transformed to a spatial representation that preserves informational characteristics from the documents. The spatial representation may then be visually browsed and analyzed in ways that avoid language processing and that reduce the analysts' mental workload. The result is an interaction with text that more nearly resembles perception and action with the natural world than with the abstractions of written language.
infovis-1995-08	VRMosaic: Web Access from within a Virtual Environment. Virtual reality can aid in designing large and complex structures such as ships, skyscrapers, factories, and aircraft. But before VR can realize this potential, we need to solve a number of problems. One of these problems: the user's need to see and interact with non-geometric information is examined. Our VR environment, RealEyes, can display large-scale and detailed geometry at reasonable frame rates (>20 Hz) allowing a user to see and navigate within a design from a first person perspective. However, much (if not most) of the information associated with a particular design has no geometric representation. This includes information such as schematics of electrical, hydraulic, and plumbing systems; information describing materials or processes; and descriptive (textual) information of other types. Many researchers have developed a wealth of techniques for presenting such data on flat-screen displays, but until recently, we have not had a means for naturally displaying such information within a VR environment. To make non-geometric data more available, we have implemented a version of Mosaic that functions within a fully immersive VR system. Our system, VRMosaic, allows a user of VR to access and display most of the data available using flat screen Mosaic. Moreover, we have made it extensible to allow for the seamless integration of specialized forms of data and interaction. This paper describes how we implemented VRMosaic using a VR-capable version of Interviews, It also describes some Mosaic-like uses of that system and some "non-Mosaic-like" extensions.
infovis-1995-09	IVEE: an Information Visualization and Exploration Environment. The Information Visualization and Exploration Environment (NEE) is a system for automatic creation of dynamic queries applications. IVEE imports database relations and automatically creates environments holding visualizations and query devices. IVEE offers multiple visualizations such as maps and starfields, and multiple query devices, such as sliders, alphasliders, and toggles. Arbitrary graphical objects can be attached to database objects in visualizations. Multiple visualizations may be active simultaneously. Users can interactively lay out and change between types of query devices. Users may retrieve details-on-demand by clicking on visualization objects. An HTML file may be provided along with the database, specifying how details-on-demand information should be presented, allowing for presentation of multimedia information in database objects. Finally, multiple IVEE clients running on separate workstations on a network can communicate by letting one user's actions affect the visualization in an another IVEE client.
infovis-1995-10	Research Report: Interacting with Huge Hierarchies: Beyond Cone Trees. The paper describes an implementation of a tool for visualizing and interacting with huge information hierarchies, and some preliminary empirical evaluation of the tool's efficacy. Existing systems for visualizing huge hierarchies using cone trees "break down" once the hierarchy to be displayed exceeds roughly 1000 nodes, due to increasing visual clutter. The paper describes a system called fsviz which visualizes arbitrarily large hierarchies while retaining user control. This is accomplished by augmenting cone trees with several graphical and interaction techniques: usage-based filtering, animated zooming, hand-coupled rotation, fish-eye zooming, coalescing of distant nodes, texturing, effective use of colour for depth cueing, and the applications of dynamic queries. The fsviz system also improves upon earlier cone tree visualization systems through a more elaborate node layout algorithm. This algorithm enhances the usefulness of cone tree visualization for large hierarchies by all but eliminating clutter.
infovis-1995-11	Research report. DataSpace: 3-D visualizations of large databases. DataSpace is a system for interactive 3-D visualization and analysis of large databases. DataSpace utilizes the display space by placing panels of information, possibly generated by different visualization applications, in a 3-D graph layout, and providing continuous navigation facilities. Selective rearrangements and transparency can be used to reduce occlusion or to compare or merge a set of images (e.g. line graphs or scatter plots) that are aligned and stacked in depth. A prototype system supporting the basic 3-D graphic operations (layout, zoom, rotation, translation, transparency) has been implemented. We provide several illustrative examples of DataSpace displays taken from the current system. We present the 3-D display paradigm, describe the query, layout and rendering steps required to create a display, and discuss some performance issues.
infovis-1995-12	Case study. Narcissus: visualising information. It is becoming increasingly important that support is provided for users who are dealing with complex information spaces. The need is driven by the growing number of domains where there is a requirement for users to understand, navigate and manipulate large sets of computer based data; by the increasing size and complexity of this information and by the pressures to use this information efficiently. The paradigmatic example is the World Wide Web, but other domains include software systems, information systems and concurrent engineering. One approach to providing this support is to provide sophisticated visualisation tools which lead the users to form an intuitive understanding of the structure and behaviour of their domain and which provide mechanisms which allow them to manipulate objects within their system. The paper describes such a tool and a number of visualisation techniques that it implements.
infovis-1995-13	Case study. Visualising cyberspace: information visualisation in the Harmony Internet browser. The explosive growth of information systems on the Internet has clearly demonstrated the need to organise, filter, and present information in ways which allow users to cope with the sheer quantities of information available. The scope for visualisation of Gopher and WWW spaces is restricted by the limitations of their respective data models. The far richer data model supported by the Hyper-G Internet information system is exploited by its Harmony client to provide a number of tightly-coupled, two- and three-dimensional visualisation and navigational facilities, which help provide location feedback and alleviate user disorientation.
infovis-1995-14	Case study: fishing for information on the Internet. As the Internet continues to grow, the amount of accessible information becomes increasingly vast. Search tools exist that allow users to find relevant information. However, a search can often produce such a large amount of data that it becomes hard to ferret out the most appropriate and highest quality information. In addition, some search tools lose valuable information when displaying the results to the user. The paper describes a search visualization tool, called FISH, for viewing hierarchically structured information and managing information overload. FISH (Forager for the Information Super Highway) allows users to visualize the results of search requests across large document spaces in a way that preserves the structure of the information space. FISH displays the returned documents as rectangles, using a combination of order, indentation, size, and color to denote document hierarchy, the score of the documents with respect to the search, and other data attributes. In addition, the user can navigate through the document space for in-depth probing and refinement.
infovis-1995-15	Case study. A WWW viewpoint on scientific visualization: an EPA case study for technology transfer. The paper examines how to provide scientific visualization capabilities to environmental scientists, policy analysts and decision makers with personal computers (PCs) on their desktops. An approach for using the World Wide Web (WWW) for disseminating knowledge on scientific visualization and for intelligent access to visualization capabilities on high performance (UNIX) workstations is outlined.
infovis-1995-16	Case study: an empirical investigation of thumbnail image recognition. The use of thumbnails (i.e., miniatures) in the user-interface of image databases allows searching and selection of images without the need for naming policies. Treating parent images prior to reduction with edge-detecting smoothing, lossy image compression, or static codebook compression resulted in thumbnails where the distortion caused by reduction was lessened. An experiment assessing these techniques found resulting thumbnails could be recognised more quickly and accurately than thumbnails of the same parent images that had been reduced without treatment. This pretreatment in thumbnail creation is offered as an improvement.
infovis-1995-17	Case study: visualizing Internet resources. The goal is to improve the ability of people from all walks of life and interests to access, search, and use the information distributed in Internet resources. The process of interacting with information resources starts with browsing, continues with digesting and assimilating pieces of information, terminates with generation of new information, and begins anew with analysis of pre-existing and new information. Our approach is user-centric-taking users needs into account by allowing them to interact with the information contained in large arrays of documents. The visualization process is an integral part of the overall process. We have covered three related categories in this methodology. The first one is browsing through the World-Wide Web (WWW) hyperspace without becoming lost, based on a visual representation of the hyperspace hierarchical structure (hyperspace view). The second category is overcoming the rigidity of the WWW by allowing the user to construct interactively and visually a personal hyperspace of information, linking the documents according to the application or problem domain, or to the user's own perception, experience, culture, or way of thinking. The third category includes discovery and analysis of new information and relationships in retrieved documents by aggregating relevant information and representing it visually.
infovis-1995-18	Case study: 3D displays of Internet traffic. The explosive growth in world-wide communications, especially the Internet, has highlighted the need for techniques to visualize network traffic. The traditional node and link network displays work well for small datasets but become visually cluttered and uninterpretable for large datasets. A natural 3D metaphor for displaying world-wide network data is to position the nodes on a globe and draw arcs between them coding the traffic. This technique has several advantages of over the traditional 2D displays, it naturally reduces line crossing clutter, provides an intuitive model for navigation and indication of time, and retains the geographic context. Coupling these strengths with some novel interaction techniques involving the globe surface translucency and arc heights illustrates the usefulness for this class of displays.
infovis-1996-01	Visage: A User Interface Environment for Exploring Information,. Visage is a prototype user interface environment for exploring and analyzing information. It represents an approach to coordinating multiple visualizations, analysis and presentation tools in data-intensive domains. Visage is based on an information-centric approach to user interface design which strives to eliminate impediments to direct user access to information objects across applications and visualizations. Visage consists of a set of data manipulation operations, an intelligent system for generating a wide variety of data visualizations (SAGE) and a briefing tool that supports the conversion of visual displays used during exploration into interactive presentation slides. This paper presents the user interface components and styles of interaction that are central to Visage's information-centric approach
infovis-1996-02	Data Characterization for Automatically Visualizing Heterogeneous Information. Automated graphical generation systems should be able to design effective presentations for heterogeneous (quantitative and qualitative) information in static or interactive environments. When building such a system, it is important to thoroughly understand the presentation-related characteristics of domain-specific information. We define a data-analysis taxonomy that can be used to characterize heterogeneous information. In addition to capturing the presentation-related properties of data, our characterization takes into account the user's information-seeking goals and visual-interpretation preferences. We use automatically-generated examples from two different application domains to demonstrate the coverage of the proposed taxonomy and its utility for selecting effective graphical techniques
infovis-1996-03	Rapid Prototyping of Information Visualizations Using VANISH. Discusses a software tool called VANISH (Visualizing And Navigating Information Structured Hierarchically), which supports the rapid prototyping of interactive 2D and 3D information visualizations. VANISH supports rapid prototyping through a special-purpose visual language called VaPL (VANISH Programming Language) tailored for visualizations, through a software architecture that insulates visualization-specific code from changes in both the domain being visualized and the presentation toolkit used, and through the reuse of visualization techniques between application domains. The generality of VANISH is established by showing how it is able to re-create a wide variety of ?standard? visualization techniques. VANISH's support for prototyping is shown through an extended example, where we build a C++ class browser, exploring many visualization alternatives in the process
infovis-1996-04	On the Semantics of Interactive Visualizations. Interactive techniques are powerful tools for manipulating visualizations to analyze, communicate and acquire information. This is especially true for large data sets or complex 3D visualizations. Although many new types of interaction have been introduced recently, very little work has been done on understanding what their components are, how they are related and how they can be combined. This paper begins to address these issues with a framework for classifying interactive visualizations. Our goal is a framework that will enable us to develop toolkits for assembling visualization interfaces both interactively and automatically
infovis-1996-05	Techniques for Non-Linear Magnification Transformations. This paper presents efficient methods for implementing general non-linear magnification transformations. Techniques are provided for: combining linear and non-linear magnifications, constraining the domain of magnifications, combining multiple transformations, and smoothly interpolating between magnified and normal views. In addition piecewise linear methods are introduced which allow greater efficiency and expressiveness than their continuous counterparts.
infovis-1996-06	Distortion Viewing Techniques for 3D Data. As the use of 3D information presentation becomes more prevalent, the need for effective viewing tools grows accordingly. Much work has been done in developing tools for 2D spaces which allow for detail in context views. We examine the extension of such 2D methods to 3D and explore the limitations encountered in accessing internal regions of the data with these methods. We then describe a novel solution to this problem of internal access with the introduction of a distortion function which creates a clear line of sight to the focus revealing sections previously obscured. The distortion is symmetric about the line of sight and is smoothly integrated back into the original 3D layout
infovis-1996-07	524,288 Ways to Say 'This is Interesting'. Visualization is a critical technology for understanding complex, data-rich systems. Effective visualizations make important features of the data immediately recognizable and enable the user to discover interesting and useful results by highlighting patterns. A key element of such systems is the ability to interact with displays of data by selecting a subset for further investigation. This operation is needed for use in linked-views systems and in drill-down analysis. It is a common manipulation in many other systems. It is as ubiquitous as selecting icons in a desktop GUI. It is therefore surprising to note that little research has been done on how selection can be implemented. This paper addresses this omission, presenting a taxonomy for selection mechanisms and discussing the interactions between branches of the taxonomy. Our suggestion of 524,288 possible systems [2^16 operation systems2 (memory/memoryless)2 (data-dependent/independent)2 (brush/lasso)] is more in fun than serious, as within the taxonomy there are many different choices that can be made. This framework is the result of considering both the current state of the art and historical antecedents
infovis-1996-08	Geospatial Metadata Querying & Visualization on the WWW Using Java Applets. This paper presents the query and visualization interfaces of the Master Environmental Library (MEL) system. MEL uses the World Wide Web (WWW) to make accessible distributed data whose metadata conform to the Federal Geographic Data Committee's (FGDC) content standards for digital geospatial metadata. The interfaces are implemented as Java^TM applets and are more intuitive, interactive and possess greater functionality than their Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) counterparts. As well as querying, the interface allows users to visualize and manage the list of query results so that users can more quickly discover the datasets of real interest. Several new tools used to visualize attributes of the metadata are presented
infovis-1996-09	Visualizing the Global Topology of MBone. We present a case study of visualizing the global topology of the Internet MBone. The MBone is the Internet's multicast backbone. Multicast is the most efficient way of distributing data from one sender to multiple receivers with minimal packet duplication. Developed and initially deployed by researchers within the Internet community, the MBone has been extremely popular for efficient transmission across the Internet of real-time video and audio streams such as conferences, meetings, congressional sessions, and NASA shuttle launches. The MBone, like the Internet itself grew exponentially with no central authority. The resulting suboptimal topology is of growing concern to network providers and the multicast research community. We create a geographic representation of the tunnel structure as arcs on a globe by resolving the latitude and longitude of MBone routers. The interactive 3D maps permit an immediate understanding of the global structure unavailable from the data in its original form as lines of text with only hostnames and IP addresses. Data visualization techniques such as grouping and thresholding allow further analysis of specific aspects of the MBone topology. We distribute the interactive 3D maps through the World-Wide Web using the VRML file format thus allowing network maintainers throughout the world to analyze the structure move effectively than would be possible with still pictures or pre-made videos
infovis-1996-10	Visualizing Usability Log Data. Our approach to testing graphical user interfaces involves logging large amounts of data. These logs capture information at the key press and mouse click level about how an application is used. Since the raw data is voluminous and not at a useful level of detail, we use analysis and visualization to find information that is interesting and useful to a usability analyst but was previously buried in the data. We call some of our custom visualizations ?contextual? meaning they use key elements of the context the data was collected in as an organizing structure. We expect this type of visualization to be easier and faster to understand and more helpful than traditional charts. We hope that our finding a natural geometry for these visualizations will inspire others whose data apparently has no inherent geometry to find natural ways to visualize their data
infovis-1996-11	DEPICT: Documents Evaluated as Pictures. Visualizing Information Using Context Vectors and Self Organizing Maps. HNC Software, Inc. has developed a system called DEPICT for visualizing the information content of large textual corpora. The system is built around two separate neural network methodologies: context vectors and self-organizing maps. Context vectors (CVs) are high dimensional information representations that encode the semantic content of the textual entities they represent. Self-organizing maps (SOMs) are capable of transforming an input, high dimensional signal space into a much lower (usually two or three) dimensional output space useful for visualization. Neither process requires human intervention, nor an external knowledge base. Together, these neural network techniques can be utilized to automatically identify the relevant information themes present in a corpus, and present those themes to the user in a intuitive visual form
infovis-1996-12	Visualizing a Tennis Match. This paper describes our work on visualizing the information of a tennis match. We use competition trees to organize the information of a tennis match and visualize the competition trees by the top-nesting layered maps with translucent colored layers. We create iconic representations to describe the detailed information of athletic events in an intuitive manner. Specialized views of the information are displayed by applying multiple Magic Lens filters on the top-nesting layered maps. The dynamic nature of the tennis match is depicted by the time-varying display. The approach we present in this paper can be used to visualize other sports information, information with competition property, or information with hierarchical structure
infovis-1996-13	Towards Rich Information Landscapes for Visualising Structured Web Spaces. The Harmony browser for the Hyper-G Web server utilizes Hyper-G's rich data to provide a number of tightly-coupled, two- and three-dimensional visualisation and navigational facilities. In particular, the Harmony Information Landscape visualises the hierarchical structure of HYPer-G spaces upon a plane in three-dimensional space. The Harmony Information Landscape has now been extended to display a combined structure and link map by selectively superimposing hyperlink relationships in the vertical dimension above and below the hierarchy map. In addition, documents returned by search queries may be selectively "plotted" in the landscape, indicating their whereabouts in a broader context, and several sets of 3d icons are available for representing the various document types.
infovis-1996-14	Visualizing the Results of Multimedia Web Search Engines. Search engines are very useful because they allow the user to retrieve documents of interest from the World- Wide Web. However, if the user's query results in lots of records to be retrieved, just listing the results is not very user-friendly. We are developing a system that allows the visualization of the results. Visualizations of both text and image search are generated on the fly based on the search results.
infovis-1996-15	Minimally-immersive Interactive Volumetric Information Visualization. This paper describes a minimally immersive volumetric interactive system for information visualization. The system, SFA, uses glyph-based volume rendering, enabling more information attributes to be visualized than traditional 2D and surface-based information visualization systems. Two-handed interaction and stereoscopic viewing combine to produce a minimally immersive interactive system that enhances the user's three-dimensional perception of the information space, capitalizing on the human visual system's pre-attentive learning capabilities to quickly analyze the displayed information. We describe the usefulness of this system for the visualization of document similarity within a corpus of textual documents. SFA allows the three-dimensional volumetric visualization, manipulation, navigation, and analysis of multivariate, time-varying information spaces, increasing the quantity and clarity of information conveyed from the visualization as compared to traditional 2D information systems.
infovis-1996-16	Interactive Visualization of Multiway Tables. Many business data visualization applications involve large databases with dozens of fields and millions of rows. Interactive visualization of these databases is difficult because of the large amount of data involved. We present a method of summarizing large databases which is well-suited to interactive visualization. We illustrate this with a visualization tool for the domain of call billing data.
infovis-1996-17	FINESSE: A Financial Information Spreadsheet. We outline a spreadsheet-based system for visualization of real-time financial information. Our system permits the user to define arithmetic and presentation relationships amongst the various cells of the spreadsheet. The cells contain primitives that can be numbers, text, images, functions, and graphics. Presenting financial information in this format allows its intended clients, the financial analysts, to work in the familiar environment of a spreadsheet and allows them the flexibility afforded by the powerful interface of the spreadsheet paradigm. In addition, our system permits real-time visualization of the financial data stream allowing its user to visually track the changing market trends in two and three dimensions.
infovis-1996-18	Animating Multidimensional Scaling to Visualizing N-Dimensional Data Sets. Many techniques have been developed for visualizing multivariate (multidimensional) data. Most, if not all, are limited by the number of dimensions which can be effectively displayed. Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) is an iterative non-linear technique for projecting n-D data down to a lower number of dimensions. This work presents extensions to MDS that enhance visualization of high-dimensional data sets. These extensions include animation, stochastic perturbation, and flow visualization techniques.
infovis-1996-19	Dual Multiresolution HyperSlice for Multivariate Data Visualization. We present a new multiresolution visualization design which allows a user to control the physical data resolution as well as the logical display resolution of multivariate data. A system prototype is described which uses the Hyperslice representation. The notion of space projection in multivariate data is introduced. This process is coupled with wavelets to form a powerful tool for very large data visualization.
infovis-1997-01	H3: laying out large directed graphs in 3D hyperbolic space. We present the H3 layout technique for drawing large directed graphs as node-link diagrams in 3D hyperbolic space. We can lay out much larger structures than can be handled using traditional techniques for drawing general graphs because we assume a hierarchical nature of the data. We impose a hierarchy on the graph by using domain-specific knowledge to find an appropriate spanning tree. Links which are not part of the spanning tree do not influence the layout but can be selectively drawn by user request. The volume of hyperbolic 3-space increases exponentially, as opposed to the familiar geometric increase of euclidean 3-space. We exploit this exponential amount of room by computing the layout according to the hyperbolic metric. We optimize the cone tree layout algorithm for 3D hyperbolic space by placing children on a hemisphere around the cone mouth instead of on its perimeter. Hyperbolic navigation affords a Focus+Context view of the structure with minimal visual clutter. We have successfully laid out hierarchies of over 20,000 nodes. Our implementation accommodates navigation through graphs too large to be rendered interactively by allowing the user to explicitly prune or expand subtrees.
infovis-1997-02	Visualizing Information on a Sphere. We describe a method for the visualization of information units on spherical domains which is employed in the banking industry for risk analysis, stock prediction and other tasks. The system is based on a quantification of the similarity of related objects that governs the parameters of a mass-spring system. Unlike existing approaches we initialize all information units onto the inner surface of two concentric spheres and attach them with springs to the outer sphere. Since the spring stiffnesses correspond to the computed similarity measures, the system converges into an energy minimum which reveals multidimensional relations and adjacencies in terms of spatial neighborhoods. Depending on the application scenario our approach supports different topological arrangements of related objects. In order to cope with large data sets we propose a blobby clustering mechanism that enables encapsulation of similar objects by implicit shapes. In addition, we implemented various interaction techniques allowing semantic analysis of the underlying data sets. Our prototype system IVORY is written in Java, and its versatility is illustrated by an example from financial service providers.
infovis-1997-03	A spreadsheet approach to information visualization. In information visualization, as the volume and complexity of the data increases, researchers require more powerful visualization tools that enable them to more effectively explore multidimensional datasets. We discuss the general utility of a novel visualization spreadsheet framework. Just as a numerical spreadsheet enables exploration of numbers, a visualization spreadsheet enables exploration of visual forms of information. We show that the spreadsheet approach facilitates certain information visualization tasks that are more difficult using other approaches. Unlike traditional spreadsheets, which store only simple data elements and formulas in each cell, a visualization spreadsheet cell can hold an entire complex data set, selection criteria, viewing specifications, and other information needed for a full-fledged information visualization. Similarly, inter-cell operations are far more complex, stretching beyond simple arithmetic and string operations to encompass a range of domain-specific operators. We have built two prototype systems that illustrate some of these research issues. The underlying approach in our work allows domain experts to define new data types and data operations, and enables visualization experts to incorporate new visualizations, viewing parameters, and view operations.
infovis-1997-04	Adaptive information visualization based on the user's multiple viewpoints-interactive 3D visualization of the WWW. We introduce the adaptive information visualization method for hypermedia and the WWW based on the user's multiple viewpoints. We propose two graphical interfaces, the CVI and the RF-Cone. The CVI is the interface for interactive viewpoint selection. We can select a viewpoint reflecting our interests by using the CVI. According to the given viewpoint, the RF-Cone adaptively organizes the 3D representation of the hypermedia so that we can understand the semantic and structural relationship of the hypermedia and easily retrieve the information. Combining these methods, we have developed the WWW visualization system which can provide highly efficient navigation.
infovis-1997-05	Managing Software with New Visual Representations. Managing large projects is a very challenging task requiring the tracking and scheduling of many resources. Although new technologies have made it possible to automatically collect data on project resources, it is very difficult to access this data because of its size and lack of structure. We present three novel glyphs for simplifying this process and apply them to visualizing statistics from a multi-million line software project. These glyphs address four important needs in project management: viewing time dependent data; managing large data volumes; dealing with diverse data types; and correspondence of data to real-world concepts.
infovis-1997-06	On Integrating Visualization Techniques for Effective Software Exploration. This paper describes the SHriMP visualization technique for seamlessly exploring software structure and browsing source code, with a focus on effectively assisting hybrid program comprehension strategies. The technique integrates both pan+zoom and fisheye-view visualization approaches for exploring a nested graph view of software structure. The fisheye-view approach handles multiple focal points, which are necessary when examining several subsystems and their mutual interconnections. Source code is presented by embedding code fragments within the nodes of the nested graph. Finer connections among these fragments are represented by a network that is navigated using a hypertext link-following metaphor. SHriMP combines this hypertext metaphor with animated panning and zooming motions over the nested graph to provide continuous orientation and contextual cues for the user. The SHriMP tool is being evaluated in several user studies. Observations of users performing program understanding tasks with the tool are discussed.
infovis-1997-07	Cacti: a front end for program visualization. We describe a system that allows the user to rapidly construct program visualizations over a variety of data sources. Such a system is a necessary foundation for using visualization as an aid to software understanding. The system supports an arbitrary set of data sources so that information from both static and dynamic analysis can be combined to offer meaningful software visualizations. It provides the user with a visual universal-relation front end that supports the definition of queries over multiple data sources without knowledge of the structure or contents of the sources. It uses a flexible back end with a range of different visualizations, most geared to the efficient display of large amounts of data. The result is a high-quality, easy-to-define program visualization that can address specific problems and hence is useful for software understanding. The overall system is flexible and extensible in that both the underlying data model and the set of visualizations are defined in resource files.
infovis-1997-08	Business Demonstration: The Year 2000 Problem. 
infovis-1997-09	Nonlinear Magnification Fields. We introduce nonlinear magnification fields as an abstract representation of nonlinear magnification, providing methods for converting transformation routines to magnification fields and vice-versa. This new representation provides ease of manipulation and power of expression. By removing the restrictions of explicit foci and allowing precise specification of magnification values, we can achieve magnification effects which were not previously possible. Of particular interest are techniques we introduce for expressing complex and subtle magnification effects through magnification brushing, and allowing intrinsic properties of the data being visualized to create data-driven magnifications.
infovis-1997-10	Managing multiple focal levels in Table Lens. The Table Lens, focus+context visualization for large data tables, allows users to see 100 times as many data values as a spreadsheet in the same screen space in a manner that enables an extremely immediate form of exploratory data analysis. In the original Table Lens design, data are shown in the context area using graphical representations in a single pixel row. Scaling up the Table Lens technique beyond approximately 500 cases (rows) by 40 variables (columns) requires not showing every value individually and thus raises challenges for preserving the exploratory and navigational ease and power of the original design. We describe two design enhancements for introducing regions of less than a pixel row for each data value and discuss the issues raised by each.
infovis-1997-11	Coordinating Declarative Queries with a Direct Manipulation Data Exploration Environment. Interactive visualization techniques allow data exploration to be a continuous process, rather than a discrete sequence of queries and results as in traditional database systems. However limitations in expressive power of current visualization systems force users to go outside the system and form a new dataset in order to perform certain operations, such as those involving the relationship among multiple objects. Further, there is no support for integrating data from the new dataset into previous visualizations, so users must recreate them. Visage's information centric paradigm provides an architectural hook for linking data across multiple queries, removing this overhead. This paper describes the addition to Visage of a visual query language, called VQE, which allows users to express more complicated queries than in previous interactive visualization systems. Visualizations can be created from queries and vice versa. When either is updated, the other changes to maintain consistency.
infovis-1997-12	Domesticating Bead: Adapting an Information Visualization System to a Financial Institution. The Bead visualization system employs a fast algorithm for laying out high-dimensional data in a low-dimensional space, and a number of features added to 3D visualizations to improve imageability. We describe recent work on both aspects of the system, in particular a generalization of the data types laid out and the implementation of imageability features in a 2D visualization tool. The variety of data analyzed in a financial institution such as UBS, and the ubiquity of spreadsheets as a medium for analysis, led us to extend our layout tools to handle data in a generic spreadsheet format. We describe the metrics of similarity used for this data type, and give examples of layouts of sets of records of financial trades. Conservatism and scepticism with regard to 3D visualization, along with the lack of functionality of widely available 3D web browsers, led to the development of a 2D visualization tool with refinements of a number of our imageability features.
infovis-1997-13	Design and evaluation of incremental data structures and algorithms for dynamic query interfaces. A dynamic query interface (DQI) is a database access mechanism that provides continuous real-time feedback to the user during query formulation. Previous work shows that DQIs are elegant and powerful interfaces to small databases. Unfortunately, when applied to large databases, previous DQI algorithms slow to a crawl. We present a new incremental approach to DQI algorithms and display updates that work well with large databases, both in theory and in practice.
infovis-1997-14	Research Report: Volume Rendering for Relational Data. A method for efficiently volume rendering dense scatterplots of relational data is described. Plotting difficulties that arise from large numbers of data points, categorical variables, interaction with non-axis dimensions, and unknown values, are addressed by this method. The domain of the plot is voxelized using binning and then volume rendering. Since a table is used as the underlying data structure, no storage is wasted on regions with no data. The opacity of each voxel is a function of the number of data points in a corresponding bin. A voxel's color is derived by averaging the value of one of the variables for all the data points that fall in a bin. Other variables in the data may be mapped to external query sliders. A dragger object permits a user to select regions inside the volume.
infovis-1997-15	The Structure of the Information Visualization Design Space. Research on information visualization has reached the point where a number of successful point designs have been proposed and a variety of techniques have been discovered. It is now appropriate to describe and analyze portions of the design space so as to understand the differences among designs and to suggest new possibilities. This paper proposes an organization of the information visualization literature and illustrates it with a series of examples. The result is a framework for designing new visualizations and augmenting existing designs.
infovis-1997-16	Multidimensional Detective. The display of multivariate datasets in parallel coordinates, transforms the search for relations among the variables into a 2-D pattern recognition problem. This is the basis for the application to visual data mining. The knowledge discovery process together with some general guidelines are illustrated on a dataset from the production of a VLSI chip. The special strength of parallel coordinates is in modeling relations. As an example, a simplified economic model is constructed with data from various economic sectors of a real country. The visual model shows the interelationship and dependencies between the sectors, circumstances where there is competition for the same resource, and feasible economic policies. Interactively, the model can be used to do trade-off analyses, discover sensitivities, do approximate optimization, monitor (as in a process) and provide decision support.
infovis-1997-17	Metrics for effective information visualization. Metrics for information visualization will help designers create and evaluate 3D information visualizations. Based on experience from 60+ 3D information visualizations, the metrics we propose are: number of data points and data density; number of dimensions and cognitive overhead; occlusion percentage; and reference context and percentage of identifiable points.
infovis-1998-01	WebPath - a Three-dimensional Web History. A number of usability studies report that many users of the WWW cannot find pages already visited, additionally many users cannot visualise where they are, or where they have been browsing. Currently, readily available WWW browsers provide history mechanisms that offer little or no support in the presentation and manipulation of visited sites. Manipulation and presentation of usage data, such as a browse history has been used in a number of cases to aid users in searching for previously attained data, and to teach or assist other users in their browse or searching techniques. The paper presents a virtual reality (VR) based application to be used alongside traditional Web browsers, which provides them with a flexibly tailorable real time visualisation of their history
infovis-1998-02	Traversal-based Visualization of Data Structures. Algorithm animation systems and graphical debuggers perform the task of translating program state into visual representations. While algorithm animations typically rely on user augmented source code to produce visualizations, debuggers make use of symbolic information in the target program. As a result, visualizations produced by debuggers often lack important semantic content, making them inferior to algorithm animation systems. The paper presents a method to provide higher level, more informative visualizations in a debugger using a technique called traversal based visualization. The debugger traverses a data structure using a set of user supplied patterns to identify parts of the data structure to be drawn a similar way. A declarative language is used to specify the patterns and the actions to take when the patterns are encountered. Alternatively, the user can construct traversal specifications through a graphical user interface to the declarative language. Furthermore, the debugger supports modification of data. Changes made to the on-screen representation are reflected in the underlying data
infovis-1998-03	Reconfigurable disc trees for visualizing large hierarchical information space. We present a new visualization technique, called RDT (Reconfigurable Disc Tree) which can alleviate the disadvantages of cone trees significantly for large hierarchies while maintaining its context of using 3D depth. In RDT, each node is associated with a disc, around which its children are placed. Using discs instead of cones as the basic shape in RDT has several advantages: significant reduction of occluded region, sharp increase in number of displayed nodes, and easy projection onto plane without visual overlapping. We show that RDT can greatly enhance user perception by transforming its shapes dynamically in several ways: (1) disc tree which can significantly reduce the occluded region by the foreground objects; (2) compact disc tree which can increase the number of nodes displayed on the screen; and (3) plane disc tree which can be mapped onto the plane without visual overlapping. We describe an implementation of our visualization system called VISIT (Visual Information System for reconfigurable dIsc tree). It provides 2D and 3D layouts for RDT and various user interface features such as tree reconfiguration, tree transformation, tree shading, viewing transformation, animation, selection and browsing which can enhance the user perception and navigation capabilities. We also evaluate our system using the following three metrics: percentage of occlusion, density of displayed nodes on a screen, and number of identifiable nodes
infovis-1998-04	An interactive view for hierarchical clustering. The paper describes a visualization of a general hierarchical clustering algorithm that allows the user to manipulate the number of classes produced by the clustering method without requiring a radical re-drawing of the clustering tree. The visual method used, a space filling recursive division of a rectangular area, keeps the items under consideration at the same screen position, even while the number of classes is under interactive control. As well as presenting a compact representation of the clustering with different cluster numbers, this method is particularly useful in a linked views environment where additional information can be added to a display to encode other information, without this added level of detail being perturbed when changes are made to the number of clusters
infovis-1998-05	Dynamic aggregation with circular visual designs. One very effective method for managing large data sets is aggregation or binning. We consider two aggregation methods that are tightly coupled with interactive manipulation and the visual representation of the data. Through this integration we hope to provide effective support for the aggregation process, specifically by enabling: 1) automatic aggregation, 2) continuous change and control of the aggregation level, 3) spatially based aggregates, 4) context maintenance across different aggregate levels, and 5) feedback on the level of aggregation
infovis-1998-06	The Generalized Detail-In-Context Problem. The paper describes a general formulation of the ?detail-in-context? problem, which is a central issue of fundamental importance to a wide variety of nonlinear magnification systems. A number of tools are described for dealing with this problem effectively. These tools can be applied to any continuous nonlinear magnification system, and are not tied to specific implementation features of the system that produced the original transformation. Of particular interest is the development of ?seamless multi level views?, which allow multiple global views of an information space (each having different information content) to be integrated into a single view without discontinuity
infovis-1998-07	Similarity Clustering of Dimensions for an Enhanced Visualization of Multidimensional Data. The order and arrangement of dimensions (variates) is crucial for the effectiveness of a large number of visualization techniques such as parallel coordinates, scatterplots, recursive pattern, and many others. We describe a systematic approach to arrange the dimensions according to their similarity. The basic idea is to rearrange the data dimensions such that dimensions showing a similar behavior are positioned next to each other. For the similarity clustering of dimensions, we need to define similarity measures which determine the partial or global similarity of dimensions. We then consider the problem of finding an optimal one- or two-dimensional arrangement of the dimensions based on their similarity. Theoretical considerations show that both, the one- and the two-dimensional arrangement problem are surprisingly hard problems, i.e. they are NP complete. Our solution of the problem is therefore based on heuristic algorithms. An empirical evaluation using a number of different visualization techniques shows the high impact of our similarity clustering of dimensions on the visualization results
infovis-1998-08	Uncluttering Force-Directed Layouts. 
infovis-1998-09	Combining Topological & Multidimensional Scaling for Visualizing Large Datasets. 
infovis-1998-10	An operator interaction framework for visualization systems. Information visualization encounters a wide variety of different data domains. The visualization community has developed representation methods and interactive techniques. As a community, we have realized that the requirements in each domain are often dramatically different. In order to easily apply existing methods, researchers have developed a semiology of graphic representations. We have extended this research into a framework that includes operators and interactions in visualization systems, such as a visualization spreadsheet. We discuss properties of this framework and use it to characterize operations spanning a variety of different visualization techniques. The framework developed in the paper enables a new way of exploring and evaluating the design space of visualization operators, and helps end users in their analysis tasks
infovis-1998-11	Algorithm Visualization for Distributed Environments. The paper investigates the visualization of distributed algorithms. We present a conceptual model and a system, VADE, that realizes this model. Since in asynchronous distributed systems there is no way of knowing (let alone, visualizing) the ?real? execution, we show how to generate a visualization which is consistent with the execution of the distributed algorithm. We also present the design and implementation of our system. VADE is designed so that the algorithm runs on the server's machines while the visualization is executed on a Web page on the client's machine. Programmers can write animations quickly and easily with the assistance of VADE's libraries
infovis-1998-12	IVORY - an object-oriented Framework for Physics-Based Information Visualization in Java. We present IVORY a newly developed, platform-independent framework for physics based visualization. IVORY is especially designed for information visualization applications and multidimensional graph layout. It is fully implemented in Java 1.1 and its architecture features client server setup, which allows us to run the visualization even on thin clients. In addition, VRML 2.0 exports can be viewed by any VRML plugged-in WWW browser. Individual visual metaphors are invoked into IVORY via an advanced plug-in mechanism, where plug-ins can be implemented by any experienced user. The configuration of IVORY is accomplished using a script language, called IVML. Some interactive visualization examples, such as the integration of a haptic interface illustrate the performance and versatility of our system. Our current implementation supports NT 4.0
infovis-1998-13	Geographic Visualization: Designing Manipulable Maps for Exploring Temporally Varying Georeferenced Statistics. Geographic visualization, sometimes called cartographic visualization, is a form of information visualization in which principles from cartography, geographic information systems (GIS), exploratory data analysis (EDA), and information visualization more generally are integrated in the development and assessment of visual methods that facilitate the exploration, analysis, synthesis, and presentation of georeferenced information. The authors report on development and use of one component of a prototype GVis environment designed to facilitate exploration, by domain experts, of time series multivariate georeferenced health statistics. Emphasis is on how manipulable dynamic GVis tools may facilitate visual thinking, pattern noticing, and hypothesis generation. The prototype facilitates the highlighting of data extremes, examination of change in geographic patterns over time, and exploration of similarity among georeferenced variables. A qualitative exploratory analysis of verbal protocols and transaction logs is used to characterize system use. Evidence produced through the characterization highlights differences among experts in data analysis strategies (particularly in relation to the use of attribute ?focusing? combined with time series animation) and corresponding differences in success at noticing spatiotemporal patterns
infovis-1998-14	Information Slices: Visualising and Exploring Large Hierarchies using Cascading, Semi-Circular Discs. This paper presents work in progress on a new technique for visualising and manipulating large hierarchies. The information slices approach compactly visualises hierarchical structures using a series of semi-circular discs. The technique is described in the context of our early experience with a prototype file system visualiser based on information slices.
infovis-1998-15	Enhancing Visualizations with Motion. 
infovis-1998-16	Bringing the Advantages of 3D Distortion Viewing Into Focus. 
infovis-1998-17	Saying It in Graphics: From Intentions to Visualizations. The authors propose a methodology for automatically realizing communicative goals in graphics. It features a task model that mediates the communicative intent and the selection of graphical techniques. The methodology supports the following functions: isolating assertions presentable in graphics; mapping such assertions into tasks for the potential reader, and selecting graphical techniques that support those tasks. They illustrate the methodology by redesigning a textual argument into a multimedia one with the same rhetorical and content structures but employing graphics to achieve some of the intentions
infovis-1998-18	Visualizing Decision Table Classifiers. Decision tables, like decision trees or neural nets, are classification models used for prediction. They are induced by machine learning algorithms. A decision table consists of a hierarchical table in which each entry in a higher level table gets broken down by the values of a pair of additional attributes to form another table. The structure is similar to dimensional stacking. A visualization method is presented that allows a model based on many attributes to be understood even by those unfamiliar with machine learning. Various forms of interaction are used to make this visualization more useful than other static designs
infovis-1998-19	Comparative Visualization of Protein Structure-Sequence Alignments. Protein fold recognition (threading) involves the prediction of a protein's three-dimensional shape based on its similarity to a protein whose structure is known. Fold predictions are low resolution; no effort is made to rotate the protein's component amino acid side chains into their correct spatial orientations. Rather, the goal is to recognize the protein family member that most closely resembles the target sequence of unknown structure and to create a sensible alignment of the target to the structure (i.e., a structure-sequence alignment). To complement this structure prediction method the authors have implemented a low resolution molecular graphics tool. Since amino acid side chain orientation is not relevant in fold recognition, amino acid residues are represented by abstract shapes or glyphs much like Lego^TM blocks. They also borrow techniques from comparative streamline visualization to provide clean depictions of the entire protein structure model. By creating a low resolution representation of protein structure, they are able to approximately double the amount of information on the screen. This implementation also possesses the advantage of eliminating distracting and possibly misleading visual clutter resulting from the mapping of protein alignment information onto a high resolution display of a known structure
infovis-1998-20	Tactical map-based information. 
infovis-1998-21	Visualizing Contract Wins & Losses. 
infovis-1998-22	Contextual Model Fitting. 
infovis-1998-23	Navigating Aggregation Spaces. Aggregation is both a simple and a powerful modeling technique for highlighting trends in noisy data. Aggregation is also needed to make inquiries on subsets of data; for example, to find average or minimum values. We define the space of aggregations on a multi-dimensional data space, define the relationship between aggregation and smoothing, and introduce the Aggregation Eye interface for smooth and interactive specification of aggregations. We illustrate the advantages of such exploratory aggregation using data from the United States Census.
infovis-1998-24	Lensbar - Visualization for Browsing and Filtering Large Lists of Data. The author proposes a simple and powerful graphical interface tool called the LensBar for filtering and visualizing large lists of data. Browsing and querying are the most important tasks in retrieving information and LensBar integrates the two techniques into a simple scroll window with slider. While it looks familiar to users of conventional graphical interface tools, its filtering and zooming features offer sophisticated handling of large lists of textual data
infovis-1998-25	The Shape of Shakespeare: Visualizing Text Using Implicit Surfaces. Information visualization focuses on the use of visual means for exploring non-visual information. While free-form text is a rich, common source of information, visualization of text is a challenging problem since text is inherently non-spatial. The paper explores the use of implicit surface models for visualizing text. The authors describe several techniques for text visualization that aid in understanding document content and document relationships. A simple method is defined for mapping document content to shape. By comparing the shapes of multiple documents, global content similarities and differences may be noted. In addition, they describe a visual clustering method in which documents are arranged in 3D based upon similarity scoring. Documents deemed closely related blend together as a single connected shape. Hence, a document corpus becomes a collection of shapes that reflect inter-document relationships. These techniques provide methods to visualize individual documents as well as corpus meta-data. They then combine the two techniques to produce transparent clusters enclosing individual document shapes. This provides a way to visualize both local and global contextual information. Finally, they elaborate on several potential applications of these methods
infovis-1998-26	BiblioMapper: A Cluster-based Information Visualization Technique. The purpose of the paper is to develop a visualization system of a document space, called BiblioMapper, for CISI collections, one of the bibliographic databases available on the Internet. The major function of BiblioMapper is to visualize the document space with a cluster-based visualization technique. The cluster-based visualization technique assembles a set of documents according to semantic similarities. One advantage of this technique is that users are able to focus on and assess each cluster and the documents which the cluster comprises according to their information needs
infovis-1998-27	Multi-faceted Insight Through Interoperable Visual Information Analysis Paradigms. To gain insight and understanding of complex information collections, users must be able to visualize and explore many facets of the information. The paper presents several novel visual methods from an information analyst's perspective. The authors present a sample scenario, using the various methods to gain a variety of insights from a large information collection. They conclude that no single paradigm or visual method is sufficient for many analytical tasks. Often a suite of integrated methods offers a better analytic environment in today's emerging culture of information overload and rapidly changing issues. They also conclude that the interactions among these visual paradigms are equally as important as, if not more important than, the paradigms themselves
infovis-1999-01	Cluster and Calendar Based Visualization of Time Series Data. A new method is presented to get an insight into univariate time series data. The problem addressed is how to identify patterns and trends on multiple time scales (days, weeks, seasons) simultaneously. The solution presented is to cluster similar daily data patterns, and to visualize the average patterns as graphs and the corresponding days on a calendar. This presentation provides a quick insight into both standard and exceptional patterns. Furthermore, it is well suited to interactive exploration. Two applications, numbers of employees present and energy consumption, are presented
infovis-1999-02	Visualizing Application Behavior on Superscalar Processors. The advent of superscalar processors with out-of-order execution makes it increasingly difficult to determine how well an application is utilizing the processor and how to adapt the application to improve its performance. In this paper, we describe a visualization system for the analysis of application behavior on superscalar processors. Our system provides an overview-plus-detail display of the applications execution. A timeline view of pipeline performance data shows the overall utilization of the pipeline, indicating regions of poor instruction throughput. This information is displayed using multiple time scales, enabling the user to drill down from a high-level application overview to a focus region of hundreds of cycles. This region of interest is displayed in detail using an animated cycle-by-cycle view of the execution. This view shows how instructions are reordered and executed and how functional units are being utilized. Additional context views correlate instructions in this detailed view with the relevant source code for the application. This allows the user to discover the root cause of the poor pipeline utilization and make changes to the application to improve its performance. This visualization system can be easily configured to display a variety of processor models and configurations. We demonstrate it for both the MXS and MMIX processor models.
infovis-1999-03	Sensemaking of Evolving Web Sites Using Visualization Spreadsheets. In the process of knowledge discovery, workers examine available information in order to make sense of it. By sensemaking, we mean interacting with and operating on the information with a variety of information processing mechanisms. Previously, we introduced a concept that uses the spreadsheet metaphor with cells containing visualizations of complex data. We extend and apply a cognitive model called visual sensemaking to the visualization spreadsheet. We use the task of making sense of a large Web site as a concrete example throughout the paper for demonstration. Using a variety of visualization techniques, such as the Disk Tree and Cone Tree, we show that the interactions of the visualization spreadsheet help users draw conclusions from the overall relationships of the entire information set
infovis-1999-04	Does Animation Help Users Build Mental Maps of Spatial Information?. We examine how animating a viewpoint change in a spatial information system affects a user's ability to build a mental map of the information in the space. We found that animation improves users' ability to reconstruct the information space, with no penalty on task performance time. We believe that this study provides strong evidence for adding animated transitions in many applications with fixed spatial data where the user navigates around the data space
infovis-1999-05	Evaluating a Visualization of Image Similarity as a Tool for Image Browsing. A similarity metric based on the low-level content of images can be used to create a visualisation in which visually similar images are displayed close to each other. We are carrying out a series of experiments to evaluate the usefulness of this type of visualisation as an image browsing aid. The initial experiment, described, considered whether people would find a given photograph more quickly in a visualisation than in a randomly arranged grid of images. The results show that the subjects were faster with the visualisation, although in post-experiment interviews many of them said that they preferred the clarity and regularity of the grid. We describe an algorithm with which the best aspects of the two layout types can be combined
infovis-1999-06	Domain Analysis: A Technique to Design a User-Centered Visualization Framework. Domain Analysis for Data Visualization (DADV) is a technique to use when investigating a domain where data visualizations are going to be designed and added to existing software systems. DADV was used to design the data visualization in VisEIO-LCA, which is a framework to visualize environmental data about products. Most of the visualizations are designed using the following stages: formatting data in tables, selecting visual structures, and rendering the data on the screen. Although many visualization authors perform implicit domain analysis, in this paper domain analysis is added explicitly to the process of designing visualizations with the goal of producing move usable software tools. Environmental Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) is used as a test bed for this technique
infovis-1999-07	A Framework for Focus+Context Visualization. This paper aims to give a systematic account of focus+context visualization techniques, i.e. visualizations which aim to give users integrated visual access to details and context in a data set. We introduce the notion that there are different orders of information visualization with focus+context being a second-order visualization and provide a formal framework for describing and constructing focus+context visualizations
infovis-1999-08	Navigating Hierarchies with Structure-Based Brushes. Interactive selection is a critical component in exploratory visualization, allowing users to isolate subsets of the displayed information for highlighting, deleting, analysis, or focussed investigation. Brushing, a popular method for implementing the selection process, has traditionally been performed in either screen space or data space. We introduce the concept of a structure-based brush, which can be used to perform selection in hierarchically structured data sets. Our structure-based brush allows users to navigate hierarchies by specifying focal extents and level-of-detail on a visual representation of the structure. Proximity-based coloring, which maps similar colors to data that are closely related within the structure, helps convey both structural relationships and anomalies. We describe the design and implementation of our structure-based brushing tool. We also validate its usefulness using two distinct hierarchical visualization techniques, namely hierarchical parallel coordinates and tree-maps
infovis-1999-09	Dynamic Hierarchy Specification and Visualization. This paper describes concepts that underlie the design and implementation of an information exploration system that allows users to impose arbitrary hierarchical organizations on their data. Such hierarchies allow a user to embed important semantic information into the hierarchy definition. Our goal is to recognize the significance of this implicit information and to utilize it in the hierarchy visualization. The innovative features of our system include the dynamic modification of the hierarchy definitions and the definition and implementation of a set of layout algorithms that utilize semantic information implicit in the tree construction
infovis-1999-10	Cushion Treemaps: Visualization of Hierarchical Information. A new method is presented for the visualization of hierarchical information, such as directory structures and organization structures. Cushion treemaps inherit the elegance of standard treemaps: compact, space-filling displays of hierarchical information, based on recursive subdivision of a rectangular image space. Intuitive shading is used to pro- vide insight in the hierarchical structure. During the subdivision ridges are added per rectangle, which are rendered with a simple shading model. The result is a surface that consists of recursive cushions. The method is efficient, effective, easy to use and implement, and has a wide applicability.
infovis-1999-11	3D interactive visualization for inter-cell dependencies of spreadsheets. This paper proposes a new technique to visualize dependencies among cells in a spreadsheet. In this way, the system firstly visualizes a spreadsheet on a plane in three-dimensional space, and draws arcs between interrelated cells. By allowing a user to select an arbitrary cell and lift it up with direct manipulation, the system utilizes the third dimension to ameliorate visual occlusion of crossing arcs. As the user lifts a focused cell up, the interrelated cells are lifted up together; thus hidden dataflow networks can be visually intelligible interactively. Because spreadsheets are aimed at calculation itself rather than appearances of outputs, their mechanism is relatively invisible and not obvious for ordinary users. Our visualization helps such users to understand structures and mechanism of spreadsheets
infovis-1999-12	Efficient Multi-Object Dynamic Query Histograms. Dynamic queries offer continuous feedback during range queries, and have been shown to be effective and satisfying. Recent work has extended them to datasets of 100,000 objects and, separately, to queries involving relations among multiple objects. The latter work enables filtering houses by properties of their owners, for instance. Our primary concern is providing feedback from histograms during dynamic query. The height of each histogram bar shows the count of selected objects whose attribute value falls into a given range. Unfortunately, previous efficient algorithms for single object queries overcount in the case of multiple objects if for instance, a house has multiple owners. This paper presents an efficient algorithm that with high probability closely approximates the true counts
infovis-1999-13	Aggregate Towers: Scale Sensitive Visualization and Decluttering of Geospatial Data. We have developed a technique, Aggregate Towers, that allows geospatial data to be visualized across a range of map scales. We use a combination of data aggregation algorithms and dynamically aggregating data markers (e.g., icons or symbols) to accommodate interactive zooming by a user while maintaining a representation that remains intuitive, consistent across multiple scales and uncluttered. This approach implicitly generates multiple levels of overview displays from a single set of underlying data
infovis-1999-14	Visageweb: Visualizing WWW Data in Visage. VisageWeb is an information-centric user interface to the World Wide Web built within the Visage data visualization environment. This paper traces the development of the VisageWeb project, using it to motivate an exploration of how an information-centric architecture copes with new visualization challenges. We conclude with a presentation of the VisageWeb prototype itself.
infovis-1999-15	The automated multidimensional detective. Automation has arrived to parallel coordinates. A geometrically motivated classifier is presented and applied, with both training and testing stages, to 3 real datasets. Our results compared to those from 33 other classifiers have the least error. The algorithm is based on parallel coordinates and has very low computational complexity in the number of variables and the size of the dataset-contrasted with the very high or unknown (often unstated) complexity of other classifiers, the low complexity enables the rule derivation to be done in near real-time hence making the classification adaptive to changing conditions, provides comprehensible and explicit rules-contrasted to neural networks which are black boxes, does dimensionality selection-where the minimal set of original variables (not transformed new variables as in Principal Component Analysis) required to state the rule is found, orders these variables so as to optimize the clarity of separation between the designated set and its complement-this solves the pesky ordering problem in parallel coordinates. The algorithm is display independent, hence it can be applied to very large in size and number of variables datasets. Though it is instructive to present the results visually, the input size is no longer display-limited as for visual data mining
infovis-1999-16	Visualizing Association Rules for Text Mining. An association rule in data mining is an implication of the form XY where X is a set of antecedent items and Y is the consequent item. For years researchers have developed many tools to visualize association rules. However, few of these tools can handle more than dozens of rules, and none of them can effectively manage rules with multiple antecedents. Thus, it is extremely difficult to visualize and understand the association information of a large data set even when all the rules are available. This paper presents a novel visualization technique to tackle many of these problems. We apply the technology to a text mining study on large corpora. The results indicate that our design can easily handle hundreds of multiple antecedent association rules in a three-dimensional display with minimum human interaction, low occlusion percentage, and no screen swapping
infovis-1999-17	A Java-Based Visual Mining Infrastructure and Applications. Many real-world KDD (Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining) applications involve the navigation of large volumes of information on the web, such as, Internet resources, hot topics, and telecom phone switches. Quite often users feel lost, confused and overwhelmed with displays that contain too much information. This paper discusses a new content-driven visual mining infrastructure called VisMine, that uses several innovative techniques: (1) hidden visual structure and relationships for uncluttering displays; (2) simultaneous visual presentations for high-dimensional knowledge discovery; and (3) a new visual interface to plug in existing graphic toolkits for expanding its use in a wide variety of visual applications. We have applied this infrastructure to three data mining visualization applications-topic hierarchy for document navigation, web-based trouble shooting, and telecom switch mining
infovis-1999-18	The Sunflower Visual Metaphor, a New Paradigm for Dimensional Compression. This paper introduces the Sunflower visual metaphor for information visualization. The visual metaphor is presented as an alternative to current techniques of dimensional compression and the visualization tools that employ them. The paper discusses the motivation for the Sunflower paradigm, its implementation and critical factors for producing an effective visualization. A primary driver in this research effort has been to develop a visualization tool that facilitates browsing, knowledge discovery, and that supports learning through sense making and integration of new information
infovis-1999-19	Constellation: A Visualization Tool for Linguistic Queries from MindNet. Constellation is a visualization system for the results of queries from the MindNet natural language semantic network. Constellation is targeted at helping MindNets creators and users refine their algorithms, as opposed to understanding the structure of language. We designed a special-purpose graph layout algorithm which exploits higher-level structure in addition to the basic node and edge connectivity. Our layout prioritizes the creation of a semantic space to encode plausibility instead of traditional graph drawing metrics like minimizing edge crossings. We make careful use of several perceptual channels both to minimize the visual impact of edge crossings and to emphasize highlighted constellations of nodes and edges.
infovis-2000-01	Polaris: A System for Query, Analysis, and Visualization of Multi-Dimensional Relational Databases. In the last several years, large multi-dimensional databases have become common in a variety of applications such as data warehousing and scientific computing. Analysis and exploration tasks place significant demands on the interfaces to these databases. Because of the size of the data sets, dense graphical representations are more effective for exploration than spreadsheets and charts. Furthermore, because of the exploratory nature of the analysis, it must be possible for the analysts to change visualizations rapidly as they pursue a cycle involving first hypothesis and then experimentation. The authors present Polaris, an interface for exploring large multi-dimensional databases that extends the well-known Pivot Table interface. The novel features of Polaris include an interface for constructing visual specifications of table based graphical displays and the ability to generate a precise set of relational queries from the visual specifications. The visual specifications can be rapidly and incrementally developed, giving the analyst visual feedback as they construct complex queries and visualizations
infovis-2000-02	Getting portals to behave. Data visualization environments help users understand and analyze their data by permitting interactive browsing of graphical representations of the data. To further facilitate understanding and analysis, many visualization environments have special features known as portals, which are sub-windows of a data canvas. Portals provide a way to display multiple graphical representations simultaneously, in a nested fashion. This makes portals an extremely powerful and flexible paradigm for data visualization. Unfortunately, with this flexibility comes complexity. There are over a hundred possible ways each portal can be configured to exhibit different behaviors. Many of these behaviors are confusing and certain behaviors can be inappropriate for a particular setting. It is desirable to eliminate confusing and inappropriate behaviors. The authors construct a taxonomy of portal behaviors and give recommendations to help designers of visualization systems decide which behaviors are intuitive and appropriate for a particular setting. They apply these recommendations to an example setting that is fully visually programmable and analyze the resulting reduced set of behaviors. Finally, the authors consider a real visualization environment and demonstrate some problems associated with behaviors that do not follow their recommendations
infovis-2000-03	A Scalable Framework for Information Visualization. This paper describes major concepts of a scalable information visualization framework. We assume that the exploration of heterogenous information spaces at arbitrary levels of detail requires a suitable preprocessing of information quantities, the combination of different graphical interfaces and the illustration of the frame of reference of given information sets. The innovative features of our system include dynamic hierarchy computation and user controlled refinement of those hierarchies for preprocessing unstructured information spaces, a new Focus+Context technique for visualizing complex hierarchy graphs, a new paradigm for visualizing information structures within their frame of reference and a new graphical interface that utilizes textual similarities to arrange objects of high dimensional information space in 3-dimensional visualization space.
infovis-2000-04	Visualizing massive multi-digraphs. We describe MGV, an integrated visualization and exploration system for massive multi-digraph navigation. MGV's only assumption is that the vertex set of the underlying digraph corresponds to the set of leaves of a predetermined tree T. MGV builds an out-of-core graph hierarchy and provides mechanisms to plug in arbitrary visual representations for each graph hierarchy slice. Navigation from one level to another of the hierarchy corresponds to the implementation of a drill-down interface. In order to provide the user with navigation control and interactive response, MGV incorporates a number of visualization techniques like interactive pixel-oriented 2D and 3D maps, statistical displays, multi-linked views, and a zoomable label based interface. This makes the association of geographic information and graph data very natural. MGV follows the client-server paradigm and it is implemented in C and Java-3D. We highlight the main algorithmic and visualization techniques behind the tools and point out along the way several possible application scenarios. Our techniques are being applied to multi-graphs defined on vertex sets with sizes ranging from 100 million to 250 million vertices
infovis-2000-05	Density Functions for Visual Attributes and Effective Partitioning in Graph Visualization. Two tasks in graph visualization require partitioning: the assignment of visual attributes and divisive clustering. Often, we would like to assign a color or other visual attributes to a node or edge that indicates an associated value. In an application involving divisive clustering, we would like to partition the graph into subsets of graph elements based on metric values in such a way that all subsets are evenly populated. Assuming a uniform distribution of metric values during either partitioning or coloring can have undesired effects such as empty clusters or only one level of emphasis for the entire graph. Probability density functions derived from statistics about a metric can help systems succeed at these tasks
infovis-2000-06	Focus+context display and navigation techniques for enhancing radial, space-filling hierarchy visualizations. Radial, space-filling visualizations can be useful for depicting information hierarchies, but they suffer from one major problem. As the hierarchy grows in size, many items become small, peripheral slices that are difficult to distinguish. We have developed three visualization/interaction techniques that provide flexible browsing of the display. The techniques allow viewers to examine the small items in detail while providing context within the entire information hierarchy. Additionally, smooth transitions between views help users maintain orientation within the complete information space
infovis-2000-07	A Taxonomy of Visualization Techniques Using the Data State Reference Model. In previous work, researchers have attempted to construct taxonomies of information visualization techniques by examining the data domains that are compatible with these techniques. This is useful because implementers can quickly identify various techniques that can be applied to their domain of interest. However, these taxonomies do not help the implementers understand how to apply and implement these techniques. The author extends and proposes a new way to taxonomize information visualization techniques by using the Data State Model (E.H. Chi and J.T. Reidl, 1998). In fact, as the taxonomic analysis in the paper will show, many of the techniques share similar operating steps that can easily be reused. The paper shows that the Data State Model not only helps researchers understand the space of design, but also helps implementers understand how information visualization techniques can be applied more broadly
infovis-2000-08	GADGET/IV: A Taxonomic Approach to Semi-Automatic Design of Information Visualization Applications Using Modular Visualization Environment. Since novice users of visualization systems lack knowledge and expertise in data visualization, it is a tough task for them to generate efficient and effective visualizations that allow them to comprehend information that is embedded in the data. Therefore, systems supporting the users to design appropriate visualizations are of great importance. The GADGET (Goal-oriented Application Design Guidance for modular visualization EnvironmenTs) system, which has been developed by the authors (1997), interactively helps users to design scientific visualization applications by presenting appropriate MVE (Modular Visualization Environment) prototypes according to the specification of the visualization goals expressed mainly with the Wehrend matrix (S. Wehrend & C. Lewis, 1990). This paper extends this approach in order to develop a system named GADGET/IV, which is intended to provide the users with an environment for semi-automatic design of information visualization (IV) applications. To this end, a novel goal-oriented taxonomy of IV techniques is presented. Also, an initial design of the system architecture and user assistance flow is described. The usefulness of the GADGET/IV system is illustrated with example problems of Web site access frequency analysis
infovis-2000-09	Redefining the Focus and Context of Focus+Context Visualizations. The increasing diversity of computers, especially among small mobile devices such as mobile phones and PDAs, raise new questions about information visualization techniques developed for the desktop computer. Using a series of examples ranging from applications for ordinary desktop displays to web-browsers and other applications for PDAs, we describe how a focus+context technique, Flip Zooming, is changed due to the situation it is used in. Based on these examples, we discuss how the use of focus and context in focus+context techniques change in order to fit new areas of use for information visualization. By doing so, we hope to enrich the understanding of how focus+context techniques as a whole may be further developed.
infovis-2000-10	From Metaphor to Method: Cartographic Perspectives on Information Visualization. By virtue of their spatio-cognitive abilities, humans are able to navigate through geographic space as well as meaningfully communicate geographic information represented in cartographic form. The current dominance of spatial metaphors in information visualization research is the result of the realization that those cognitive skills also have value in the exploration and analysis of non-geographic information. While mapping or landscape metaphors are routinely used in this field, there is a noticeable lack of consideration for existing cartographic expertise. This is especially apparent whenever problematic issues are encountered, such as graphic complexity or feature labeling. There are a number of areas in which a cartographic outlook could provide a valuable perspective. This paper discusses how geographic and cartographic notions may influence the design of visualizations for textual information spaces. Map projections, generalization, feature labeling and map design issues are discussed
infovis-2000-11	Information content measures of visual displays. With an increase in the number of different visualization techniques, it becomes necessary to develop a measure for evaluating the effectiveness of visualizations. Metrics to evaluate visual displays were developed based on measures of information content developed by Shannon and used in communication theory. These measures of information content can be used to quantify the relative effectiveness of displays
infovis-2000-12	Visualizing Sequential Patterns for Text Mining. A sequential pattern in data mining is a finite series of elements such as ABCD where A, B, C, and D are elements of the same domain. The mining of sequential patterns is designed to find patterns of discrete events that frequently happen in the same arrangement along a timeline. Like association and clustering, the mining of sequential patterns is among the most popular knowledge discovery techniques that apply statistical measures to extract useful information from large datasets. As out computers become more powerful, we are able to mine bigger datasets and obtain hundreds of thousands of sequential patterns in full detail. With this vast amount of data, we argue that neither data mining nor visualization by itself can manage the information and reflect the knowledge effectively. Subsequently, we apply visualization to augment data mining in a study of sequential patterns in large text corpora. The result shows that we can learn more and more quickly in an integrated visual data-mining environment
infovis-2000-13	ThemeRiver: visualizing theme changes over time. ThemeRiverTM is a prototype system that visualizes thematic variations over time within a large collection of documents. The river flows from left to right through time, changing width to depict changes in thematic strength of temporally associated documents. Colored currents flowing within the river narrow or widen to indicate decreases or increases in the strength of an individual topic or a group of topics in the associated documents. The river is shown within the context of a timeline and a corresponding textual presentation of external events
infovis-2000-14	Lighthouse: showing the way to relevant information. Lighthouse is an on-line interface for a Web-based information retrieval system. It accepts queries from a user, collects the retrieved documents from the search engine, organizes and presents them to the user. The system integrates two known presentations of the retrieved results, the ranked list and clustering visualization, in a novel and effective way. It accepts the user's input and adjusts the document visualization accordingly. We give a brief overview of the system
infovis-2000-15	New methods for the visualization of electric power system information. One area in need of new research in information visualization is the operation and analysis of large-scale electric power systems. In analyzing power systems, one is usually confronted with a large amount of multivariate data. With systems containing tens of thousands of electrical nodes (buses), a key challenge is to present this data in a form so the user can assess the state of the system in an intuitive and quick manner. This is particularly true when trying to analyze relationships between actual network power flows, the scheduled power flows, and the capacity of the transmission system. With electric industry restructuring and the move towards having a single entity, such as an independent system operator or pool, operate a much larger system, this need has become more acute. This paper presents several power system visualization techniques to help in this task. These techniques include animation of power system flow values, contouring of bus and transmission line flow values, data aggregation techniques and interactive 3D data visualization
infovis-2000-16	Collaborative Geographic Visualization: Enabling Shared Understanding of Environmental Processes. We describe a prototype same-time/different-place collaborative geovisualization environment. We outline an approach to understanding use and usability and present results of interviews with domain experts about the ways in which collaborative visualization might enable groups to work at a distance. One goal for our research is to design an effective and flexible system that can support group work on environmental science research mediated through dynamic geovisualization displays. We are addressing this goal using a four-step human-centered system design process, modeled on that proposed by (Gabbard et al., 1999) for development and evaluation of virtual environments. The steps they delineate are: user task analysis; expert guideline-based evaluation; formative user-centered evaluation; and summative comparative evaluation
infovis-2000-17	Interactive problem solving via algorithm visualization. COMIND is a tool for conceptual design of industrial products. It helps designers define and evaluate the initial design space by using search algorithms to generate sets of feasible solutions. Two algorithm visualization techniques, Kaleidoscope and Lattice, and one visualization of n-dimensional data, MAP, are used to externalize the machine's problem solving strategies and the tradeoffs as a result of using these strategies. After a short training period, users are able to discover tactics to explore design space effectively, evaluate new design solutions, and learn important relationships among design criteria, search speed and solution quality. We thus propose that visualization can serve as a tool for interactive intelligence, ie., human-machine collaboration for solving complex problems
infovis-2000-18	Metaphor-Aware 3D Navigation. Anyone who has ever experienced three-dimensional (3D) inter- faces will agree that navigating in a 3D world is not a trivial task. The user interface of traditional 3D browsers provides simple navigation tools that allow the user to modify the camera parameters such as orientation, position and focal. Using these tools, it is frequent that, after some movements, the user is lost in the virtual 3D space and usually tries to restart from the beginning. This paper presents how the 3D navigation problem is addressed in the context of the CyberNet project [2]. Our underlying principle is to help the user navigate by adapting the navigation tool to the virtual world. We feel that the navigation schemes provided by the 3D browsers are too generic for some specific 3D tools and we have developed adaptive navigation features that are dependent on the 3D metaphor used for visualizing the information and on the users task.
infovis-2000-19	Creativity, Complexity, and Precision: Information Visualization for (Landscape) Architecture. Drawing on ethnographic studies of (landscape) architects at work, this paper presents a human-centered approach to information visualization. A 3D collaborative electronic workspace allows people to configure, save, and browse arrangements of heterogeneous work materials. Spatial arrangements and links are created and maintained as an integral part of ongoing work with live documents and objects. The result is an extension of the physical information space of the architects studio that utilizes the potential of electronic data storage, visualization, and network technologies to support work with information in context.
infovis-2000-20	Using Visualization to Detect Plagiarism in Computer Science Classes. This paper introduces a number of general methods for visualizing commonality in sets of text files. Each visualization simultaneously compares one file in the set to all other files in the set. These visualizations, which can be computed in O(n) time and space, are explained and then applied to the problem of detecting plagiarism in large computer science classes. A case study is presented and sample visualizations are provided. Finally, a new interactive tool that can be used to produce and manipulate these visualizations is presented.
infovis-2001-01	Visualizing Time-Series on Spirals. In this paper, we present a new approach for the visualization of time-series data based on spirals. Different to classical bar charts and line graphs, the spiral is suited to visualize large data sets and supports much better the identification of periodic structures in the data. Moreover, it supports both the visualization of nominal and quantitative data based on a similar visualization metaphor. The extension of the spiral visualization to 3D gives access to concepts for zooming and focusing and linking in the data set. As such, spirals complement other visualization techniques for time series and specifically enhance the identication of periodic patterns.
infovis-2001-02	Change blindness in information visualization: a case study. Change blindness occurs when people do not notice changes in visible elements of a scene. If people use an information visualization system to compare document collection subsets partitioned by their time-stamps, change blindness makes it impossible for them to recognize even very major changes, let alone minor ones. We describe theories from cognitive science that account for the change blindness phenomenon, as well as solutions developed for two visual analysis tools, a dot plot ( SPIRE Galaxies) and landscape (ThemeView) visualizations.
infovis-2001-03	Cluster stability and the use of noise in interpretation of clustering. A clustering and ordination algorithm suitable for mining extremely large databases, including those produced by microarray expression studies, is described and analyzed for stability. Data from a yeast cell cycle experiment with 6000 genes and 18 experimental measurements per gene are used to test this algorithm under practical conditions. The process of assigning database objects to an X,Y coordinate, ordination, is shown to be stable with respect to random starting conditions, and with respect to minor perturbations in the starting similarity estimates. Careful analysis of the way clusters typically co-locate, versus the occasional large displacements under different starting conditions are shown to be useful in interpreting the data. This extra stability information is lost when only a single cluster is reported, which is currently the accepted practice. However, it is believed that the approaches presented here should become a standard part of best practices in analyzing computer clustering of large data collections.
infovis-2001-04	Technical Note: Visually Encoding Program Test Information to Find Faults in Software. Large test suites are frequently used to evaluate software systems and to locate errors. Unfortunately, this process can generate a huge amount of data that is difficult to interpret manually. We have created a system, TARANTULA, that visually encodes test data to help find program errors. The system uses a principled color mapping to represent how source lines act in passed and failed tests. It also provides a flexible user interface for examining different perspectives that show the behavior of the source code on test sets, ranging from individual tests, to important subsets such as the set of failed tests, to the entire test suite.
infovis-2001-05	Getting along: composition of visualization paradigms. This paper describes how focus+context techniques can be composed with other high-level visualization paradigms to mutual advantage. Examples are given showing composition both with a pan&zoom system, and with a treemap implementation. The examples illustrate how focus+context can be used as an exploration and navigation tool within those paradigms.
infovis-2001-06	Animated exploration of dynamic graphs with radial layout. We describe a new animation technique for supporting interactive exploration of a graph. We use the wellknown radial tree layout method, in which the view is determined by the selection of a focus node. Our main contribution is a method for animating the transition to a new layout when a new focus node is selected. In order to keep the transition easy to follow, the animation linearly interpolates the polar coordinates of the nodes, while enforcing ordering and orientation constraints. We apply this technique to visualizations of social networks and of the Gnutella file-sharing network, and discuss the results from our informal usability tests.
infovis-2001-07	Effective graph visualization via node grouping. We discuss four methodologies for the application of node grouping in graph visualization. In addition, we introduce techniques for force-directed and orthogonal drawing which use node grouping information and have been shown in experiments to perform better than previous techniques. Not only do these techniques have significantly improved performance with respect to standard aesthetic measures, but they also attain qualitative improvement.
infovis-2001-08	Visualization of State Transition Graphs. A new method for the visualization of state transition graphs is presented. Visual information is reduced by clustering nodes, forming a tree structure of related clusters. This structure is visualized in three dimensions with concepts from cone trees and emphasis on symmetry. The resulting visualization makes it easier to relate features in the visualization of the state transition graph to semantic concepts in the corresponding process and vice versa.
infovis-2001-09	Technical Note: Graph Sketches. We introduce the notion of Graph Sketches. They can be thought of as visual indices that guide the navigation of a multi-graph too large to fit on the available display. We adhere to the Visual Information-Seeking Mantra: Overview first, zoom and filter, then details on demand. Graph Sketches are incorporated into MGV, an integrated visualization and exploration system for massive multi-digraph navigation. We highlight the main algorithmic and visualization tasks behind the computation of Graph Sketches and illustrate several application scenarios. Graph Sketches will be used to guide the navigation of multi-digraphs defined on vertex sets with sizes ranging from 100 to 250 million vertices.
infovis-2001-10	Ordered Treemap Layouts. Treemaps, a space-filling method of visualizing large hierarchical data sets, are receiving increasing attention. Several algorithms have been proposed to create more useful displays by controlling the aspect ratios of the rectangles that make up a treemap. While these algorithms do improve visibility of small items in a single layout, they introduce instability over time in the display of dynamically changing data, and fail to preserve an ordering of the underlying data. This paper introduces the ordered treemap, which addresses these two shortcomings. The ordered treemap algorithm ensures that items near each other in the given order will be near each other in the treemap layout. Using experimental evidence from Monte Carlo trials, we show that compared to other layout algorithms ordered treemaps are more stable while maintaining relatively favorable aspect ratios of the constituent rectangles. A second test set uses stock market data.
infovis-2001-11	Collapsible cylindrical trees: a fast hierarchical navigation technique. This paper proposes a new visualization and interaction technique for medium-sized trees, called Collapsible Cylindrical Trees (CCT). Child nodes are mapped on rotating cylinders, which will be dynamically displayed or hidden to achieve a useful balance of detail and context. Besides a comprehensible threedimensional visualization of trees, the main feature of CCT is a very fast and intuitive interaction with the displayed nodes. Only a single click is needed to reach every node and perform an action on it, such as displaying a web page. The CCT browsing technique was developed for interaction with web hierarchies but is not limited to this domain. We also present sample implementations of CCT using VRML, which show the usefulness of this intuitive tree navigation technique.
infovis-2001-12	Botanical Visualization of Huge Hierarchies. A new method for the visualization of huge hierarchical data structures is presented. The method is based on the observation that we can easily see the branches, leaves, and their arrangement in a botanical tree, despite of the large number of elements. The strand model of Holton is used to convert an abstract tree into a geometric model. Non-leaf nodes are mapped to branches and child nodes to subbranches. A naive application of this model leads to unsatisfactory results, hence it is tailored to suit our purposes better. Continuing branches are emphasized, long branches are contracted, and sets of leaves are shown as fruit. The method is applied to the visualization of directory structures. The elements, directories and files, as well as their relations can easily be extracted, thereby showing that the use of methods from botanical modeling can be effective for information visualization. Keywords: botanical tree, logical tree, huge hierarchy, strands, tree visualization, directory tree, phyllotaxis.
infovis-2001-13	Semantic Depth of Field. We present a new technique called Semantic Depth of Field (SDOF) as an alternative approach to focus-andcontext displays of information. We utilize a well-known method from photography and cinematography (depth-offield effect) for information visualization, which is to blur different parts of the depicted scene in dependence of their relevance. Independent of their spatial locations, objects of interest are depicted sharply in SDOF, whereas the context of the visualization is blurred. In this paper, we present a flexible model of SDOF which can be easily adopted to various types of applications. We discuss pros and cons of the new technique, give examples of application, and describe a fast prototype implementation of SDOF.
infovis-2001-14	Interactive Visualization of Multiple Query Results. This paper introduces a graphical method for visually presenting and exploring the results of multiple queries simultaneously. This method allows a user to visually compare multiple query result sets, explore various combinations among the query result sets, and identify the best matches for combinations of multiple independent queries. This approach might also help users explore methods for progressively improving queries by visually comparing the improvement in result sets.
infovis-2001-15	Pixel Bar Charts: A New Technique for Visualizing Large Multi-Attribute Data Sets without Aggregation. Simple presentation graphics are intuitive and easy-to-use, but show only highly aggregated data and present only a very limited number of data values (as in the case of bar charts). In addition, these graphics may have a high degree of overlap which may occlude a significant portion of the data values (as in the case of the x-y plots). In this paper, we therefore propose a generalization of traditional bar charts and x-y-plots which allows the visualization of large amounts of data. The basic idea is to use the pixels within the bars to present the detailed information of the data records. Our so-called pixel bar charts retain the intuitiveness of traditional bar charts while allowing very large data sets to be visualized in an effective way. We show that, for an effective pixel placement, we have to solve complex optimization problems, and present an algorithm which efficiently solves the problem. Our application using real-world e-commerce data shows the wide applicability and usefulness of our new idea.
infovis-2001-16	An Empirical Comparison of Three Commercial Information Visualization Systems. An empirical comparison of three commercial information visualization systems on three different databases is presented. The systems use different paradigms for visualizing data. Tasks were selected to be "ecologically relevant", i.e. meaningful and interesting in the respective domains. Users of one system turned out to solve problems significantly faster than users of the other two, while users of another system would supply significantly more correct answers. Reasons for these results and general observations about the studied systems are discussed.
infovis-2001-17	A comparison of 2-D visualizations of hierarchies. This paper describes two experiments that compare four two-dimensional visualizations of hierarchies: organization chart, icicle plot, treemap, and tree ring. The visualizations are evaluated in the context of decision tree analyses prevalent in data mining applications. The results suggest that either the tree ring or icicle plot is equivalent to the organization chart.
infovis-2001-18	2D vs 3D, implications on spatial memory. Since the introduction of graphical user interfaces (GUI) and two-dimensional (2D ) displays, the concept of space has entered the information technology (IT) domain. Interactions with computers were re-encoded in terms of fidelity to the interactions with real environment and consequently in terms of fitness to cognitive and spatial abilities. A further step in this direction was the creation of three-dimensional (3D) displays which have amplified the fidelity of digital representations. However, there are no systematic results evaluating the extent to which 3D displays better support cognitive spatial abilities. The aim of this research is to empirically investigate spatial memory performance across different instances of 2D and 3D displays. Two experiments were performed. The displays used in the experimental situation represented hierarchical information structures. The results of the test show that the 3D display does improve performances in the designed spatial memory task.
infovis-2001-19	Case Study: Visualization for Decision Tree Analysis in Data Mining. Decision trees are one of the most popular methods of data mining. Decision trees partition large amounts of data into smaller segments by applying a series of rules. Creating and evaluating decision trees benefits greatly from visualization of the trees and diagnostic measures of their effectiveness. This paper describes an application, EMTree Results Viewer, that supports decision tree analysis through the visualization of model results and diagnosis. The functionality of the application and the visualization techniques are revealed through an example of churn analysis in the telecommunications industry.
infovis-2001-20	Case study: e-commerce clickstream visualization. We have developed an interactive, scalable visualization tool for analyzing the behavior of users of a web site. Our system not only shows site topology and traffic flow, but by segmenting site traffic data based on user attributes, including demographic data and purchase history, we can present a more complete picture of web site usage. This can lead to a more focussed analysis that allows direct comparison between user segments, and ultimately a deeper understanding of how users interact with a site. The tool is designed for real world use, and we present a usage study of the tool by analyzing the data of a failed dot-com.
infovis-2001-21	Case study: design and assessment of an enhanced geographic information system for exploration of multivariate health statistics. An implementation of an interactive parallel coordinate plot linked with the ArcView geographic information system (GIS) is presented. The integrated geographic visualization system was created for the exploratory analysis of mortality data from specific cancers as they relate, specifically spatially, to other mortality causes and to demographic and socioeconomic risk factors. The linked and interactive parallel coordinate plot was tested with and compared to a similarly interactive and linked scatterplot in usability assessments designed to assess each representations relative effectiveness for exploration of these data sets. Evidence from these studies suggests that multivariate, spatial, and/or time series exploration is enhanced through the use of the parallel coordinate plot linked to maps
infovis-2001-22	Graphic data display for cardiovascular system. Our multi-disciplinary group has developed a visual representation for cardiovascular physiological variables. This enhances a clinicians ability to detect and rapidly respond to critical events. The integrated and intuitive display communicates a patients cardiovascular state so that it is easily and quickly understood without prior training. The display is designed to show patterns of functional relationships that aid in the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of a critical event.
infovis-2002-01	Multiscale visualization using data cubes. Most analysts start with an overview of the data before gradually refining their view to be more focused and detailed. Multiscale pan-and-zoom systems are effective because they directly support this approach. However generating abstract overviews of large data sets is difficult, and most systems take advantage of only one type of abstraction: visual abstraction. Furthermore, these existing systems limit the analyst to a single zooming path on their data and thus a single set of abstract views. This paper presents: (1) a formalism for describing multiscale visualizations of data cubes with both data and visual abstraction, and (2) a method for independently zooming along one or more dimensions by traversing a zoom graph with nodes at different levels of detail. As an example of how to design multiscale visualizations using our system, we describe four design patterns using our formalism. These design patterns show the effectiveness of multiscale visualization of general relational databases.
infovis-2002-02	Visualization Schemas for Flexible Information Visualization. Relational databases provide significant flexibility to organize, store, and manipulate an infinite variety of complex data collections. This flexibility is enabled by the concept of relational data schemas, which allow data owners to easily design custom databases according to their unique needs. However, user interfaces and information visualizations for accessing and utilizing databases have not kept pace with this level of flexibility. This paper introduces the concept of visualization schemas, based on the Snap-Together Visualization model, which are analogous to relational data schemas. Visualization schemas enable users to rapidly construct customized multiple-view visualizations for databases in a similarly flexible fashion without programming. Since the design of appropriate visualizations for a given database depends on the data schema, visualization schemas are a natural analogy to the data schema concept.
infovis-2002-03	Building a Visual Database for Example-based Graphics Generation. Example-based graphics generation systems automatically create new information visualizations by learning from existing graphic examples. As part of the effort on developing a general-purpose example-based generation system, we are building a visual database of graphic examples. In this paper, we address two main issues involved in constructing such a database: example selection and example modeling. As a result, our work offers three unique contributions: First, we build a visual database that contains a diverse collection of well-designed examples. Second, we develop a feature-based scheme to model all examples uniformly and accurately. Third, our visual database brings several important implications to the area of information visualization.
infovis-2002-04	Graphical Encoding for Information Visualization: An Empirical Study. Research in several areas provides scientific guidance for use of graphical encoding to convey information in an information visualization display. By graphical encoding we mean the use of visual display elements such as icon color, shape, size, or position to convey information about objects represented by the icons. Literature offers inconclusive and often conflicting viewpoints, including the suggestion that the effectiveness of a graphical encoding depends on the type of data represented. Our empirical study suggests that the nature of the users' perceptual task is more indicative of the effectiveness of a graphical encoding than the type of data represented.
infovis-2002-05	The Illusion of Perceived Metric 3D Structure. A large body of results on the characteristics of human spatial vision suggests that space perception is distorted. Recent studies indicate that the geometry of visual space is best understood as Affine. If this is the case, it has far reaching implications on how 3D visualizations can be successfully employed. For instance, all attempts to build visualization systems where users are expected to discover relations based on Euclidean distances or shapes will be ineffective. Because visualization can, and sometimes do, employ all possible types of depth information and because the results from vision research usually concentrates on one or two such types, three experiments were performed under near optimal viewing conditions. The aim of the experiments was twofold: To test whether the earlier findings generalize to optimal viewing conditions and to get a sense of the size of the error under such conditions. The results show that the findings do generalize and that the errors are large. The implications of these results for successful visualizations are discussed.
infovis-2002-06	SpaceTree: supporting exploration in large node link tree, design evolution and empirical evaluation. We present a novel tree browser that builds on the conventional node link tree diagrams. It adds dynamic rescaling of branches of the tree to best fit the available screen space, optimized camera movement, and the use of preview icons summarizing the topology of the branches that cannot be expanded. In addition, it includes integrated search and filter functions. This paper reflects on the evolution of the design and highlights the principles that emerged from it. A controlled experiment showed benefits for navigation to already previously visited nodes and estimation of overall tree topology.
infovis-2002-07	InterRing: An Interactive Tool for Visually Navigating and Manipulating Hierarchical Structures. Radial, space-filling (RSF) techniques for hierarchy visualization have several advantages over traditional node-link diagrams, including the ability to efficiently use the display space while effectively conveying the hierarchy structure. Several RSF systems and tools have been developed to date, each with varying degrees of support for interactive operations such as selection and navigation. We describe what we believe to be a complete set of desirable operations on hierarchical structures. We then present InterRing, an RSF hierarchy visualization system that supports a significantly more extensive set of these operations than prior systems. In particular, InterRing supports multi-focus distortions, interactive hierarchy reconfiguration, and both semi-automated and manual selection. We show the power and utility of these and other operations, and describe our on-going efforts to evaluate their effectiveness and usability.
infovis-2002-08	A Space-Optimized Tree Visualization. We describe a new method for the visualization of tree structured relational data. It can be used especially for the display of very large hierarchies in a 2-dimensional space. We discuss the advantages and limitations of current techniques of tree visualization. Our strategy is to optimize the drawing of trees in a geometrical plane and maximize the utilization of display space by allowing more nodes and links to be displayed at a limit screen resolution. We use the concept of enclosure to partition the entire display space into a collection of local regions that are assigned to all nodes in tree T for the display of their sub-trees and themselves. To enable the exploration of large hierarchies, we use a modified semantic zooming technique to view the detail of a particular part of the hierarchy at a time based on user's interest. Layout animation is also provided to preserve the mental map while the user is exploring the hierarchy by changing zoomed views.
infovis-2002-09	Beamtrees: Compact Visualization of Large Hierarchies. Beamtrees are a new method for the visualization of large hierarchical data sets. Nodes are shown as stacked circular beams, such that both the hierarchical structure as well as the size of nodes are depicted. The dimensions of beams are calculated using a variation of the treemap algorithm. A small user study indicated that beamtrees are significantly more effective than nested treemaps and cushion treemaps for the extraction of global hierarchical information.
infovis-2002-10	Visualizing Biosequence data using Texture Mapping. Data-mining of information by the process of pattern discovery in protein sequences has been predominantly algorithm based. We discuss a visualization approach, which uses texture mapping and blending techniques to perform visual data-mining on text data obtained from discovering patterns in protein sequences. This visual approach, investigates the possibilities of representing text data in three dimensions and provides new possibilities of representing more dimensions of information in text data visualization and analysis. We also present a generic framework derived from this visualization approach to visualize text in biosequence data.
infovis-2002-11	Arc Diagrams: Visualizing Structure in Strings. This paper introduces a new visualization method, the arc diagram, which is capable of representing complex patterns of repetition in string data. Arc diagrams improve over previous methods such as dotplots because they scale efficiently for strings that contain many instances of the same subsequence. This paper describes design and implementation issues related to arc diagrams and shows how they may be applied to visualize such diverse data as music, text, and compiled code.
infovis-2002-12	Interactive Information Visualization of a Million Items. Existing information visualization techniques are usually limited to the display of a few thousand items. This article describes new interactive techniques capable of handling a million items (effectively visible and manageable on screen). We evaluate the use of hardware-based techniques available with newer graphics cards, as well as new animation techniques and non-standard graphical features such as stereovision and overlap count. These techniques have been applied to two popular information visualizations: treemaps and scatter plot diagrams; but are generic enough to be applied to other 2D representations as well.
infovis-2002-13	ACE: A Fast Multiscale Eigenvectors Computation for Drawing Huge Graphs. We present an extremely fast graph drawing algorithm for very large graphs, which we term ACE (for Algebraic multigrid Computation of Eigenvectors). ACE exhibits an improvement of something like two orders of magnitude over the fastest algorithms we are aware of; it draws graphs of millions of nodes in less than a minute. ACE finds an optimal drawing by minimizing a quadratic energy function. The minimization problem is expressed as a generalized eigenvalue problem, which is rapidly solved using a novel algebraic multigrid technique. The same generalized eigenvalue problem seems to come up also in other fields, hence ACE appears to be applicable outside of graph drawing too.
infovis-2002-14	Visual Unrolling of Network Evolution and the Analysis of Dynamic Discourse. A new method for visualizing the class of incrementally evolving networks is presented. In addition to the intermediate states of the network it conveys the nature of the change between them by unrolling the dynamics of the network. Each modification is shown in a separate layer of a three-dimensional representation, where the stack of layers corresponds to a time line of the evolution. We focus on discourse networks as the driving application, but our method extends to any type of network evolving in similar ways.
infovis-2002-15	A Hybrid Layout Algorithm for Sub-Quadratic Multidimensional Scaling. Many clustering and layout techniques have been used for structuring and visualising complex data. This paper is inspired by a number of such contemporary techniques and presents a novel hybrid approach based upon stochastic sampling, interpolation and spring models. We use Chalmers' 1996 O(N2) spring model as a benchmark when evaluating our technique, comparing layout quality and run times using data sets of synthetic and real data. Our algorithm runs in O(NN) and executes significantly faster than Chalmers' 1996 algorithm, whilst producing superior layouts. In reducing complexity and run time, we allow the visualisation of data sets of previously infeasible size. Our results indicate that our method is a solid foundation for interactive and visual exploration of data.
infovis-2002-16	Efficient Cartogram Generation: A Comparison. Cartograms are a well-known technique for showing geography-related statistical information, such as population demographics and epidemiological data. The basic idea is to distort a map by resizing its regions according to a statistical parameter, but in a way that keeps the map recognizable. We deal with the problem of making continuous cartograms that strictly retain the topology of the input mesh. We compare two algorithms to solve the continuous cartogram problem. The first one uses an iterative relocation of the vertices based on scanlines. The second one is based on the Gridfit technique, which uses pixel-based distortion based on a quadtree-like data structure.
infovis-2002-17	Visualizing Data with Bounded Uncertainty. Visualization is a powerful way to facilitate data analysis, but it is crucial that visualization systems explicitly convey the presence, nature, and degree of uncertainty to users. Otherwise, there is a danger that data will be falsely interpreted, potentially leading to inaccurate conclusions. A common method for denoting uncertainty is to use error bars or similar techniques designed to convey the degree of statistical uncertainty. While uncertainty can often be modeled statistically, a second form of uncertainty, bounded uncertainty, can also arise that has very different properties than statistical uncertainty. Error bars should not be used for bounded uncertainty because they do not convey the correct properties, so a different technique should be used instead. We describe a technique for conveying bounded uncertainty in visualizations and show how it can be applied systematically to common displays of abstract charts and graphs. Interestingly, it is not always possible to show the exact degree of uncertainty, and in some cases it can only be displayed approximately.
infovis-2002-18	Angular Brushing of Extended Parallel Coordinates. In this paper we present angular brushing for parallel coordinates (PC) as a new approach to highlighting rational data-properties, i.e., features which - in a non-separable way - depend on two data dimensions. We also demonstrate smooth brushing as an intuitive tool for specifying nonbinary degree-of-interest functions (for focus+context visualization). We also briefly describe our implementation as well as its application to the visualization of CFD data.
infovis-2002-19	Multiple Foci Drill-Down through Tuple and Attribute Aggregation Polyarchies in Tabular Data. Information analysis often involves decomposing data into sub-groups to allow for comparison and identification of relationships. Breakdown Visualization provides a mechanism to support this analysis through user guided drill-down of polyarchical metadata. This metadata describes multiple hierarchical structures for organizing tuple aggregations and table attributes. This structure is seen in financial data, organizational structures, sport statistics, and other domains. A spreadsheet format enables comparison of visualizations at any level of the hierarchy. Breakdown Visualization allows users to drill-down a single hierarchy then pivot into another hierarchy within the same view. It utilizes a fix and move technique that allows users to select multiple foci for drill-down.
infovis-2002-20	Process Visualization with Levels of Detail. We demonstrate how we apply information visualization techniques to process monitoring. Virtual instruments are enhanced using history encoding instruments are capable of displaying the current value and the value from the near past. Multi-instruments are capable of displaying several data sources simultaneously. Levels of detail for virtual instruments are introduced where the screen area is inversely proportional to the information amount displayed. Furthermore the monitoring system is enhanced by using: 3D anchoring attachment of instruments to positions on a 3D model, collision avoidance a physically based spring model prevents instruments from overlapping, and focus+context rendering - giving the user a possibility to examine particular instruments in detail without loosing the context information.
infovis-2002-21	Case study: visualizing sets of evolutionary trees. We describe a visualization tool which allows a biologist to explore a large set of hypothetical evolutionary trees. Interacting with such a dataset allows the biologist to identify distinct hypotheses about how different species or organisms evolved, which would not have been clear from traditional analyses. Our system integrates a point-set visualization of the distribution of hypothetical trees with detail views of an individual tree, or of a consensus tree summarizing a subset of trees. Efficient algorithms were required for the key tasks of computing distances between trees, finding consensus trees, and laying out the point-set visualization.
infovis-2002-22	Demystifying Venture Capital Investing. Since the crash of the dot.coms, investors have gotten a lot more careful with where they place their money. Now more than ever it becomes really important for venture capitalists (VCs) to monitor the state of the startups market and continually update their investment strategy to suit the rapidly changing market conditions. This paper presents three new visualization metaphors (Spiral Map, TimeTicker, and Double Histogram) for monitoring the startups market. While we are focusing on the VC domain, the visual metaphors developed are general and can be easily applied to other domains.
infovis-2002-23	Visual Path Analysis. We describe a system for analyzing the flow of traffic through Web sites. We decomposed the general path analysis problem into a set of distinct subproblems, and created a visual metaphor for analyzing each of them. Our system works off of multiple representations of the clickstream, and exposes the path extraction algorithms and data to the visual metaphors as Web services. We have combined the visual metaphors into a Web-based "path analysis portal" that lets the user easily switch between the different modes of analysis.
infovis-2003-01	Smooth and Efficient Zooming and Panning. Large 2D information spaces, such as maps, images, or abstract visualizations, require views at various level of detail: close ups to inspect details, overviews to maintain (literally) an overview. Users often switch between these views. We discuss how smooth animations from one view to another can be defined. To this end, a metric on the effect of simultaneous zooming and panning is defined, based on an estimate of the perceived velocity. Optimal is defined as smooth and efficient. Given the metric, these terms can be translated into a computational model, which is used to calculate an analytic solution for optimal animations. The model has two free parameters: animation speed and zoom/pan trade off. A user experiment to find good values for these is described.
infovis-2003-02	A Model of Multi-Scale Perceptual Organization in Information Graphics. We propose a new method for assessing the perceptual organization of information graphics, based on the premise that the visual structure of an image should match the structure of the data it is intended to convey. The core of our method is a new formal model of one type of perceptual structure, based on classical machine vision techniques for analyzing an image at multiple resolutions. The model takes as input an arbitrary grayscale image and returns a lattice structure describing the visual organization of the image. We show how this model captures several aspects of traditional design aesthetics, and we describe a software tool that implements the model to help designers analyze and refine visual displays. Our emphasis here is on demonstrating the model's potential as a design aid rather than as a description of human perception, but given its initial promise we propose a variety of ways in which the model could be extended and validated.
infovis-2003-03	Exploring High-D Spaces with Multiform Matrices and Small Multiples. We introduce an approach to visual analysis of multivariate data that integrates several methods from information visualization, exploratory data analysis (EDA), and geovisualization. The approach leverages the component-based architecture implemented in GeoVISTA Studio to construct a flexible, multiview, tightly (but generically) coordinated, EDA toolkit. This toolkit builds upon traditional ideas behind both small multiples and scatterplot matrices in three fundamental ways. First, we develop a general, multiform, bivariate matrix and a complementary multiform, bivariate small multiple plot in which different bivariate representation forms can be used in combination. We demonstrate the flexibility of this approach with matrices and small multiples that depict multivariate data through combinations of: scatterplots, bivariate maps, and space-filling displays. Second, we apply a measure of conditional entropy to (a) identify variables from a high-dimensional data set that are likely to display interesting relationships and (b) generate a default order of these variables in the matrix or small multiple display. Third, we add conditioning, a kind of dynamic query/filtering in which supplementary (undisplayed) variables are used to constrain the view onto variables that are displayed. Conditioning allows the effects of one or more well understood variables to be removed form the analysis, making relationships among remaining variables easier to explore. We illustrate the individual and combined functionality enabled by this approach through application to analysis of cancer diagnosis and mortality data and their associated covariates and risk factors.
infovis-2003-04	Design Choices when Architecting Visualizations. In this paper, we focus on some of the key design decisions we faced during the process of architecting a visualization system and present some possible choices, with their associated advantages and disadvantages. We frame this discussion within the context of Rivet, our general visualization environment designed for rapidly prototyping interactive, exploratory visualization tools for analysis. As we designed increasingly sophisticated visualizations, we needed to refine Rivet in order to be able to create these richer displays for larger and more complex data sets. The design decisions we discuss in this paper include: the internal data model, data access, semantic meta-data information the visualization can use to create effective visual decodings, the need for data transformations in a visualization tool, modular objects for flexibility, and the tradeoff between simplicity and expressiveness when providing methods for creating visualizations.
infovis-2003-05	InfoVis Contest. 
infovis-2003-06	Information Esthetics: from MoMA to Wall Street. My after-dinner talk has the goal of being a visual dessert, showing some of the information designs and explorations that I've put together in the last twenty years as a practicing designer and more recently, as an artist. I'll show the ones that people reacted to most strongly; partly to soothe and entertain, but partly in the hopes that some of the techniques I apply might be useful in the work of other attendees. To that end I'll present a simplified Knowledge Acquisition Pipeline, a kind of designer's checklist that has been valuable in guiding my students and me while creating information-rich displays and user interfaces. It helps organize the wide variety of techniques available to us as information designers. But more--it helps us understand why they might work, where they might be useful in a design, and even what types of information can best be shown with which techniques. It works as a generative guideline as well as an intellectual framework. I'll tie parts of the examples back to this pipeline to show how it works in practice. The application of this pipeline to visualization work suggests that as a field we are getting good value out of our understanding of the earlier processes--those having to do with sensation and perception. But later processes still have a lot of room for exploration: the visual attributes we use to represent data can often be made more specific, and therefore both more communicative and easier to decode. The world is richer than we can describe with circular nodes and linear links. And when we can get a visual vocabulary from the target audience, their own higher level semantic relationships may also be more easily absorbed and manipulated. I suggest that what such 'illustrative information displays' lose in generality they more than make up in ease of interpretation and viewer engagement.
infovis-2003-07	EdgeLens: An Interactive Method for Managing Edge Congestion in Graphs. An increasing number of tasks require people to explore, navigate and search extremely complex data sets visualized as graphs. Examples include electrical and telecommunication networks, Web structures, and airline routes. The problem is that graphs of these real world data sets have many interconnected nodes, ultimately leading to edge congestion: the density of edges is so great that they obscure nodes, individual edges, and even the visual information beneath the graph. To address this problem we developed an interactive technique called EdgeLens. An EdgeLens interactively curves graph edges away for a person's focus attention without changing the node positions. This opens up sufficient space to disambiguate node and edge relationships and to see underlying information while still preserving node layout. Initially two methods of creating this interaction were developed and compared in a user study. The results of this study were used in the selection of a basic approach and the subsequent development of the EdgeLens. We then improved the EdgeLens through use of transparency and colour and by allowing multiple lenses to appear on the graph.
infovis-2003-08	MoireGraphs: Radial Focus+Context Visualization and Interaction for Graphs with Visual Nodes. Graph and tree visualization techniques enable interactive exploration of complex relations while communicating topology. However, most existing techniques have not been designed for situations where visual information such as images is also present at each node and must be displayed. This paper presents MoireGraphs to address this need. MoireGraphs combine a new focus+context radial graph layout with a suite of interaction techniques (focus strength changing, radial rotation, level highlighting, secondary foci, animated transitions and node information) to assist in the exploration of graphs with visual nodes. The method is scalable to hundreds of displayed visual nodes.
infovis-2003-09	Visualizing Evolving Networks: Minimum Spanning Trees versus Pathfinder Networks. Network evolution is an ubiquitous phenomenon in a wide variety of complex systems. There is an increasing interest in statistically modeling the evolution of complex networks such as small-world networks and scale-free networks. In this article, we address a practical issue concerning the visualizations of co-citation networks of scientific publications derived by two widely known link reduction algorithms, namely minimum spanning trees (MSTs) and pathfinder networks (PFNETs). Our primary goal is to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the two methods in fulfilling the need for visualizing evolving networks. Two criteria are derived for assessing visualizations of evolving networks in terms of topological properties and dynamical properties. We examine the animated visualization models of the evolution of botulinum toxin research in terms of its co-citation structure across a 58-year span (1945-2002). The results suggest that although high-degree nodes dominate the structure of MST models, such structures can be inadequate in depicting the essence of how the network evolves because MST removes potentially significant links from high-order shortest paths. In contrast, PFNET models clearly demonstrate their superiority in maintaining the cohesiveness of some of the most pivotal paths, which in turn make the growth animation more predictable and interpretable. We suggest that the design of visualization and modeling tools for network evolution should take the cohesiveness of critical paths into account.
infovis-2003-10	Multiscale Visualization of Small World Networks. Many networks under study in Information Visualization are 'small world' networks. These networks first appeared in the study social networks and were shown to be relevant models in other application domains such as software reverse engineering and biology. Furthermore, many of these networks actually have a multiscale nature: they can be viewed as a network of groups that are themselves small world networks. We describe a metric that has been designed in order to identify the weakest edges in a small world network leading to an easy and low cost filtering procedure that breaks up a graph into smaller and highly connected components. We show how this metric can be exploited through an interactive navigation of the network based on semantic zooming. Once the network is decomposed into a hierarchy of sub-networks, a user can easily find groups and subgroups of actors and understand their dynamics.
infovis-2003-11	Improving Hybrid MDS with Pivot-Based Searching. An algorithm is presented for the visualisation of multidimensional abstract data, building on a hybrid model introduced at InfoVis 2002. The most computationally complex stage of the original model involved performing a nearest-neighbour search for every data item. The complexity of this phase has been reduced by treating all high-dimensional relationships as a set of discretised distances to a constant number of randomly selected pivot items. In improving this computational bottleneck, the complexity is reduced from O(NN) to O(N54). As well as documenting this improvement, the paper describes evaluation with a data set of 108000 14-dimensional items; a considerable increase on the size of data previously tested. Results illustrate that the reduction in complexity is reflected in significantly improved run times and that no negative impact is made upon the quality of layout produced.
infovis-2003-12	A Visual Workspace for Hybrid Multidimensional Scaling Algorithms. In visualising multidimensional data, it is well known that different types of algorithms to process them. Data sets might be distinguished according to volume, variable types and distribution, and each of these characteristics imposes constraints upon the choice of applicable algorithms for their visualization. Previous work has shown that a hybrid algorithmic approach can be successful in addressing the impact of data volume on the feasibility of multidimensional scaling (MDS). This suggests that hybrid combinations of appropriate algorithms might also successfully address other characteristics of data. This paper presents a system and framework in which a user can easily explore hybrid algorithms and the data flowing through them. Visual programming and a novel algorithmic architecture let the user semi-automatically define data flows and the co-ordination of multiple views.
infovis-2003-13	Dynamic Visualization of Transient Data Streams. We introduce two dynamic visualization techniques using multidimensional scaling to analyze transient data streams such as newswires and remote sensing imagery. While the time-sensitive nature of these data streams requires immediate attention in many applications, the unpredictable and unbounded characteristics of this information can potentially overwhelm many scaling algorithms that require a full re-computation for every update. We present an adaptive visualization technique based on data stratification to ingest stream information adaptively when influx rate exceeds processing rate. We also describe an incremental visualization technique based on data fusion to project new information directly onto a visualization subspace spanned by the singular vectors of the previously processed neighboring data. The ultimate goal is to leverage the value of legacy and new information and minimize re-processing of the entire dataset in full resolution. We demonstrate these dynamic visualization results using a newswire corpus and a remote sensing imagery sequence.
infovis-2003-14	Interactive Hierarchical Dimension Ordering, Spacing, and Filtering for Exploration of High Dimensional Datasets. Large number of dimensions not only cause clutter in multi-dimensional visualizations, but also make it difficult for users to navigate the data space. Effective dimension management, such as dimension ordering, spacing and filtering, is critical for visual exploration of such datasets. Dimension ordering and spacing explicitly reveal dimension relationships in arrangement-sensitive multidimensional visualization techniques, such as parallel coordinates, star glyphs, and pixel-oriented techniques. They facilitate the visual discovery of patterns within the data. Dimension filtering hides some of the dimensions to reduce clutter while preserving the major information of the dataset. In this paper, we propose an interactive hierarchical dimension ordering, spacing and filtering approach, called DOSFA. DOSFA is based on dimension hierarchies derived from similarities among dimensions. It is scalable multi-resolution approach making dimensional management a tractable task. On the one hand, it automatically generates default settings for dimension ordering, spacing and filtering. On the other hand, it allows users to efficiently control all aspects of this dimension management process via visual interaction tools for dimension hierarchy manipulation. A case study visualizing a dataset containing over 200 dimensions reveals high dimensional visualization techniques.
infovis-2003-15	Mapping Nominal Values to Numbers for Effective Visualization. Data sets with a large number of nominal variables, some with high cardinality, are becoming increasingly common and need to be explored. Unfortunately, most existing visual exploration displays are designed to handle numeric variables only. When importing data sets with nominal values into such visualization tools, most solutions to date are rather simplistic. Often, techniques that map nominal values to numbers do not assign order or spacing among the values in a manner that conveys semantic relationships. Moreover, displays designed for nominal variables usually cannot handle high cardinality variables well. This paper addresses the problem of how to display nominal variables in general-purpose visual exploration tools designed for numeric variables. Specifically, we investigate (1) how to assign order and spacing among the nominal values, and (2) how to reduce the number of distinct values to display. We propose that nominal variables be pre-processed using a distance-quantification-classing (DQC) approach before being imported into a visual exploration tool. In the distance step, we identify a set of independent dimensions that can be used to calculate the distance between nominal values. In the quantification step, we use the independent dimensions and the distance information to assign order and spacing among the nominal values. In the classing step, we use results from the previous steps to determine which values within a variable are similar to each other and thus can be grouped together. Each step in the DQC approach can be accomplished by a variety of techniques. We extended the XmdvTool package to incorporate this approach. We evaluated our approach on several data sets using a variety of evaluation measures.
infovis-2003-16	Visualization of Labeled Data Using Linear Transformations. We present a novel family of data-driven linear transformations, aimed at visualizing multivariate data in a low-dimensional space in a way that optimally preserves the structure of the data. The well-studied PCA and Fisher's LDA are shown to be special members in this family of transformations, and we demonstrate how to generalize these two methods such as to enhance their performance. Furthermore, our technique is the only one, to the best of our knowledge, that reflects in the resulting embedding both the data coordinates and pairwise similarities and/or dissimilarities between the data elements. Even more so, when information on the clustering (labeling) decomposition of the data is known, this information can be integrated in the linear transformation, resulting in embeddings that clearly show the separation between the clusters, as well as their intra-structure. All this makes our technique very flexible and powerful, and lets us cope with kinds of data that other techniques fail to describe properly.
infovis-2003-17	Intelligently Resolving Point Occlusion. Large and high-dimensional data sets mapped to low-dimensional visualizations often result in perceptual ambiguities. One such ambiguity is overlap or occlusion that occurs when the number of records exceeds the number of unique locations in the presentation or when there exist two or more records that map to the same location. To lessen the affect of occlusion, non-standard visual attributes (i.e. shading and/or transparency) are applied, or such records may be remapped to a corresponding jittered location. The resulting mapping efficiently portrays the crowding of records but fails to provide the insight into the relationship between the neighboring records. We introduce a new interactive technique that intelligibly organizes overlapped points, a neural network-based smart jittering algorithm. We demonstrate this technique on a scatter plot, the most widely used visualization. The algorithm can be applied to other one, two, and multi-dimensional visualizations which represent data as points, including 3-dimensional scatter plots, RadViz, polar coordinates.
infovis-2003-18	Constant Density Displays Using Diversity Sampling. The Informedia Digital Video Library user interface summarizes query results with a collage of representative keyframes. We present a user study in which keyframe occlusion caused difficulties. To use the screen space most efficiently to display images, both occlusion and wasted whitespace should be minimized. Thus optimal choices will tend toward constant density displays. However, previous constant density algorithms are based on global density, which leads to occlusion and empty space if the density is not uniform. We introduce an algorithm that considers the layout of individual objects and avoids occlusion altogether. Efficiency concerns are important for dynamic summaries of the Informedia Digital Video Library, which has hundreds of thousands of shots. Posting multiple queries that take into account parameters of the visualization as well as the original query reduces the amount of work required. This greedy algorithm is then compared to an optimal one. The approach is also applicable to visualizations containing complex graphical objects other than images, such as text, icons, or trees.
infovis-2003-19	Empirical Comparison of Dynamic Query Sliders and Brushing Histograms. Dynamic queries facilitate rapid exploration of information by real-time visual display of both query formulation and results. Dynamic query sliders are linked to the main visualization to filter data. A common alternative to dynamic queries is to link several simple visualizations, such as histograms, to the main visualization with a brushing interaction strategy. Selecting data in the histograms highlights that data in the main visualization. We compare these two approaches in an empirical experiment on DataMaps, a geographic data visualization tool. Dynamic query sliders resulted in better performance for simple range tasks, while brushing histograms was better for complex trend evaluation and attribute relation tasks. Participants preferred brushing histograms for understanding relationships between attributes and the rich information they provided.
infovis-2003-20	An Experimental Evaluation of Continuous Semantic Zooming in Program Visualization. This paper presents the results of an experiment aimed at investigating how different methods of viewing visual programs affect users' understanding. The first two methods used traditional flat and semantic zooming models of program representation; the third is a new representation that uses semantic zooming combined with blending and proximity. The results of several search tasks performed by approximately 80 participants showed that the new method resulted in both faster and more accurate searches than the other methods.
infovis-2003-21	Conveying shape with texture: an experimental investigation of the impact of texture type on shape categorization judgments. As visualization researchers, we are interested in gaining a better understanding of how to effectively use texture to facilitate shape perception. If we could design the ideal texture pattern to apply to an arbitrary smoothly curving shape to be most accurately and effectively perceived, what would the characteristics of that texture pattern be? In this paper we describe the results of a comprehensive controlled observer experiment intended to yield insight into that question. Here, we report the results of a new study comparing the relative accuracy of observers' judgments of shape type (elliptical, cylindrical, hyperbolic or flat) and shape orientation (convex, concave, both, or neither) for local views of boundary masked quadric surface patches under six different principal direction texture pattern conditions plus two texture conditions (an isotropic pattern and a non-principal direction oriented anisotropic pattern), under both perspective and orthographic projection conditions and from both head-on and oblique viewpoints. Our results confirm the hypothesis that accurate shape perception is facilitated to a statistically significantly greater extent by some principal direction texture patterns than by others. Specifically, we found that, for both views, under conditions of perspective projection, participants more often correctly identified the shape category and the shape orientation when the surface was textured with the pattern that contained oriented energy along both the first and second principal directions only than in the case of any other texture condition. Patterns containing markings following only one of the principal directions, or containing information along other directions in addition to the principal directions yielded poorer performance overall.
infovis-2003-22	Coordinated Graph and Scatter-Plot Views for the Visual Exploration of Microarray Time-Series Data. Microarrays are relatively new, high-throughput data acquisition technology for investigating biological phenomena at the micro-level. One of the more common procedures for microarray experimentation is that of the microarray time-course experiment. The product of microarray time-course experiment is time-series data, which subject to proper analysis has the potential to have significant impact on the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of diseases. While existing information visualization techniques go some way to making microarray time-series data more manageable, requirements analysis has revealed significant limitations. The main finding was that users were unable to uncover and quantify common changes in value over a specified time-period. This paper describes a novel technique that provides this functionality by allowing the user to visually formulate and modify measurable queries with separate time-period and condition components. These visual queries are supported by the combination of a traditional value against time graph representation of the data with a complementary scatter-plot representation of a specified time-period. The multiple views of the visualization are coordinated so that the user can formulate and modify queries with rapid reversible display of query results in the traditional value against time graph format.
infovis-2003-23	Compound Brushing. This paper proposes a conceptual model called compound brushing for modeling the brushing techniques used in dynamic data visualization. In this approach, brushing techniques are modeled as higraphs with five types of basic entities: data, selection, device, renderer, and transformation. Using this model, a flexible visual programming tool is designed not only to configure/control various common types of brushing techniques currently used in dynamic data visualization, but also to investigate new brushing techniques.
infovis-2003-24	Causality Visualization Using Animated Growing Polygons. We present Growing Polygons, a novel visualization technique for the graphical representation of causal relations and information flow in a system of interacting processes. Using this method, individual processes are displayed as partitioned polygons with color-coded segments showing dependencies to other processes. The entire visualization is also animated to communicate the dynamic execution of the system to the user. The results from a comparative user study of the method show that the Growing Polygons technique is significantly more efficient than the traditional Hasse diagram visualization for analysis tasks related to deducing information flow in a system for both small and large executions. Furthermore, our findings indicate that the correctness when solving causality tasks is significantly improved using our method. In addition, the subjective ratings of the users rank the method as superior in all regards, including usability, efficiency, and enjoyability.
infovis-2003-25	Visualization of Large-Scale Customer Satisfaction Surveys Using a Parallel Coordinate Tree. Satisfaction surveys are an important measurement tool in fields such as market research or human resources management. Serious studies consist of numerous questions and contain answers from large population samples. Aggregation on both sides, the questions asked as well as the answers received, turns the multidimensional problem into a complex system of interleaved hierarchies. Traditional ways of presenting the results are limited to one-dimensional charts and cross-tables. We developed a visualization method called the Parallel Coordinate Tree that combines multidimensional analysis with a tree structure representation. Distortion-oriented focus+context techniques are used to facilitate interaction with the visualization. In this paper we present a design study of a commercial application that we built, using this method to analyze and communicate results from large-scale customer satisfaction surveys.
infovis-2003-26	FundExplorer: Supporting the Diversification of Mutual Fund Portfolios Using Context Treemaps. An equity mutual fund is a financial instrument that invests in a set of stocks. Any two different funds may partially invest in some of the same stocks, thus overlap is common. Portfolio diversification aims at spreading an investment over many different stocks in search of greater returns. Helping people with portfolio diversification is challenging because it requires informing them about both their current portfolio of stocks held through funds and the other stocks in the market not invested in yet. Current stock/fund visualization systems either waste screen real estate and visualization of all data points. We have developed a system called FundExplorer that implements a distorted treemap to visualize both the amount of money invested in a person's fund portfolio and the context of remaining market stocks. The FundExplorer system enables people to interactively explore diversification possibilities with their portfolios.
infovis-2003-27	THREAD ARCS: An Email Thread Visualization. This paper describes Thread Arcs, a novel interactive visualization technique designed to help people use threads found in email. Thread Arcs combine the chronology of messages with the branching tree structure of a conversational thread in a mixed-model visualization by Venolia and Neustaedter (2003) that is stable and compact. By quickly scanning and interacting with Thread Arcs, people can see various attributes of conversations and find relevant messages in them easily. We tested this technique against other visualization techniques with users' own email in a functional prototype email client. Thread Arcs proved an excellent match for the types of threads found in users' email for the qualities users wanted in small-scale visualizations.
infovis-2003-28	BARD: A visualization tool for biological sequence analysis. We present BARD (biological arc diagrams), a visualization tool for biological sequence analysis. The development of BARD began with the application of Wattenberg's arc diagrams [Wattenberg 2002] to results from sequence analysis programs, such as BLAST [Altschul et al. 1990]. In this paper, we extend the initial arc diagram concept in two ways: 1) by separating the visualization method from the underlying matching algorithm and 2) by expanding the types of matches to include inexact matches, complemented palindrome matches, and inter-sequence matches. BARD renders each type of match distinctly, resulting in a powerful tool to quickly understand sequence similarities and differences. We illustrate the power of BARD by applying the technique to a comparative sequence analysis of the human pathogenic fungi Cryptococcus neoformans.
infovis-2003-29	Using Multilevel Call Matrices in Large Software Projects. Traditionally, node link diagrams are the prime choice when it comes to visualizing software architectures. However, node link diagrams often fall short when used to visualize large graph structures. In this paper we investigate the use of call matrices as visual aids in the management of large software projects. We argue that call matrices have a number of advantages over traditional node link diagrams when the main object of interest is the link instead of the node. Matrix visualizations can provide stable and crisp layouts of large graphs and are inherently well suited for large multilevel visualizations because of their recursive structure. We discuss a number of visualization issues, using a very large software project currently under development at Philips Medical Systems as a running example.
infovis-2003-30	Between Aesthetics and Utility: Designing Ambient Information Visualizations. Unlike traditional information visualization, ambient information visualizations reside in the environment of the user rather than on the screen of a desktop computer. Currently, most dynamic information that is displayed in public places consists of text and numbers. We argue that information visualization can be employed to make such dynamic data more useful and appealing. However, visualizations intended for non-desktop spaces will have to both provide valuable information and present an attractive addition to the environment - they must strike a balance between aesthetical appeal and usefulness. To explore this, we designed a real-time visualization of bus departure times and deployed it in a public space, with about 300 potential users. To make the presentation more visually appealing, we took inspiration from a modern abstract artist. The visualization was designed in two passes. First, we did a preliminary version that was presented to and discussed with prospective users. Based on their input, we did a final design. We discuss the lessons learned in designing this and previous ambient information visualizations, including how visual art can be used as a design constraint, and how the choice of information and the placement of the display affect the visualization.
infovis-2003-31	Developing Architectural Lighting Representations. This paper reports on the development of a visualization system for architectural lighting designers. It starts by motivating the problem as both complex in its physics and social organization. Three iterations of prototypes for displaying time and space varying phenomena are discussed. Fieldwork is presented to identify where in practice they will be most effective. A set of user studies, one of which is analyzed in fine-grained detail, show how building designers incorporate visualization on hypothetical design problems. This has positive implications for both energy efficiency and lighting quality in buildings.
infovis-2004-01	An Evaluation of Microarray Visualization Tools for Biological Insight. High-throughput experiments such as gene expression microarrays in the life sciences result in large datasets. In response, a wide variety of visualization tools have been created to facilitate data analysis. Biologists often face a dilemma in choosing the best tool for their situation. The tool that works best for one biologist may not work well for another due to differences in the type of insight they seek from their data. A primary purpose of a visualization tool is to provide domain-relevant insight into the data. Ideally, any user wants maximum information in the least possible time. In this paper we identify several distinct characteristics of insight that enable us to recognize and quantify it. Based on this, we empirically evaluate five popular microarray visualization tools. Our conclusions can guide biologists in selecting the best tool for their data, and computer scientists in developing and evaluating visualizations
infovis-2004-02	User Experiments with Tree Visualization Systems. This paper describes a comparative experiment with five well-known tree visualization systems, and Windows Explorer as a baseline system. Subjects performed tasks relating to the structure of a directory hierarchy, and to attributes of files and directories. Task completion times, correctness and user satisfaction were measured, and video recordings of subjects' interaction with the systems were made. Significant system and task type effects and an interaction between system and task type were found. Qualitative analyses of the video recordings were thereupon conducted to determine reasons for the observed differences, resulting in several findings and design recommendations as well as implications for future experiments with tree visualization systems
infovis-2004-03	A Comparison of the Readability of Graphs Using Node-Link and Matrix-Based Representations. In this paper, we describe a taxonomy of generic graph related tasks and an evaluation aiming at assessing the readability of two representations of graphs: matrix-based representations and node-link diagrams. This evaluation bears on seven generic tasks and leads to important recommendations with regard to the representation of graphs according to their size and density. For instance, we show that when graphs are bigger than twenty vertices, the matrix-based visualization performs better than node-link diagrams on most tasks. Only path finding is consistently in favor of node-link diagrams throughout the evaluation
infovis-2004-04	GeoTime Information Visualization. Analyzing observations over time and geography is a common task but typically requires multiple, separate tools. The objective of our research has been to develop a method to visualize, and work with, the spatial interconnectedness of information over time and geography within a single, highly interactive 3D view. A novel visualization technique for displaying and tracking events, objects and activities within a combined temporal and geospatial display has been developed. This technique has been implemented as a demonstratable prototype called GeoTime in order to determine potential utility. Initial evaluations have been with military users. However, we believe the concept is applicable to a variety of government and business analysis tasks
infovis-2004-05	RecMap: Rectangular Map Approximations. In many application domains, data is collected and referenced by its geospatial location. Nowadays, different kinds of maps are used to emphasize the spatial distribution of one or more geospatial attributes. The nature of geospatial statistical data is the highly nonuniform distribution in the real world data sets. This has several impacts on the resulting map visualizations. Classical area maps tend to highlight patterns in large areas, which may, however, be of low importance. Cartographers and geographers used cartograms or value-by-area maps to address this problem long before computers were available. Although many automatic techniques have been developed, most of the value-by-area cartograms are generated manually via human interaction. In this paper, we propose a novel visualization technique for geospatial data sets called RecMap. Our technique approximates a rectangular partition of the (rectangular) display area into a number of map regions preserving important geospatial constraints. It is a fully automatic technique with explicit user control over all exploration constraints within the exploration process. Experiments show that our technique produces visualizations of geospatial data sets, which enhance the discovery of global and local correlations, and demonstrate its performance in a variety of applications
infovis-2004-06	EZEL: a Visual Tool for Performance Assessment of Peer-to-Peer File-Sharing Network. In this paper we present EZEL, a visual tool we developed for the performance assessment of peer-to-peer file-sharing networks. We start by identifying the relevant data transferred in this kind of networks and the main performance assessment questions. Then we describe the visualization of data from two different points of view. First we take servers as focal points and we introduce a new technique, faded cushioning, which allows visualizing the same data from different perspectives. Secondly, we present the viewpoint of files, and we expose the correlations with the server stance via a special scatter plot. Finally, we discuss how our tool, based on the described techniques, is effective in the performance assessment of peer-to-peer file-sharing networks
infovis-2004-07	A History Mechanism for Visual Data Mining. A major challenge of current visualization and visual data mining (VDM) frameworks is to support users in the orientation in complex visual mining scenarios. An important aspect to increase user support and user orientation is to use a history mechanism that, first of all, provides un- and redoing functionality. In this paper, we present a new approach to include such history functionality into a VDM framework. Therefore, we introduce the theoretical background, outline design and implementation aspects of a history management unit, and conclude with a discussion showing the usefulness of our history management in a VDM framework
infovis-2004-08	Steerable, Progressive Multidimensional Scaling. Current implementations of multidimensional scaling (MDS), an approach that attempts to best represent data point similarity in a low-dimensional representation, are not suited for many of today's large-scale datasets. We propose an extension to the spring model approach that allows the user to interactively explore datasets that are far beyond the scale of previous implementations of MDS. We present MDSteer, a steerable MDS computation engine and visualization tool that progressively computes an MDS layout and handles datasets of over one million points. Our technique employs hierarchical data structures and progressive layouts to allow the user to steer the computation of the algorithm to the interesting areas of the dataset. The algorithm iteratively alternates between a layout stage in which a subselection of points are added to the set of active points affected by the MDS iteration, and a binning stage which increases the depth of the bin hierarchy and organizes the currently unplaced points into separate spatial regions. This binning strategy allows the user to select onscreen regions of the layout to focus the MDS computation into the areas of the dataset that are assigned to the selected bins. We show both real and common synthetic benchmark datasets with dimensionalities ranging from 3 to 300 and cardinalities of over one million points
infovis-2004-09	A Rank-by-Feature Framework for Unsupervised Multidimensional Data Exploration Using Low Dimensional Projections. Exploratory analysis of multidimensional data sets is challenging because of the difficulty in comprehending more than three dimensions. Two fundamental statistical principles for the exploratory analysis are (1) to examine each dimension first and then find relationships among dimensions, and (2) to try graphical displays first and then find numerical summaries (D.S. Moore, (1999). We implement these principles in a novel conceptual framework called the rank-by-feature framework. In the framework, users can choose a ranking criterion interesting to them and sort 1D or 2D axis-parallel projections according to the criterion. We introduce the rank-by-feature prism that is a color-coded lower-triangular matrix that guides users to desired features. Statistical graphs (histogram, boxplot, and scatterplot) and information visualization techniques (overview, coordination, and dynamic query) are combined to help users effectively traverse 1D and 2D axis-parallel projections, and finally to help them interactively find interesting features
infovis-2004-10	Value and Relation Display for Interactive Exploration of High Dimensional Datasets. Traditional multidimensional visualization techniques, such as glyphs, parallel coordinates and scatterplot matrices, suffer from clutter at the display level and difficult user navigation among dimensions when visualizing high dimensional datasets. In this paper, we propose a new multidimensional visualization technique named a value and relation (VaR) display, together with a rich set of navigation and selection tools, for interactive exploration of datasets with up to hundreds of dimensions. By explicitly conveying the relationships among the dimensions of a high dimensional dataset, the VaR display helps users grasp the associations among dimensions. By using pixel-oriented techniques to present values of the data items in a condensed manner, the VaR display reveals data patterns in the dataset using as little screen space as possible. The navigation and selection tools enable users to interactively reduce clutter, navigate within the dimension space, and examine data value details within context effectively and efficiently. The VaR display scales well to datasets with large numbers of data items by employing sampling and texture mapping. A case study on a real dataset, as well as the VaR displays of multiple real datasets throughout the paper, reveals how our proposed approach helps users interactively explore high dimensional datasets with large numbers of data items
infovis-2004-11	Uncovering Clusters in Crowded Parallel Coordinates Visualizations. The one-to-one strategy of mapping each single data item into a graphical marker adopted in many visualization techniques has limited usefulness when the number of records and/or the dimensionality of the data set are very high. In this situation, the strong overlapping of graphical markers severely hampers the user's ability to identify patterns in the data from its visual representation. We tackle this problem here with a strategy that computes frequency or density information from the data set, and uses such information in parallel coordinates visualizations to filter out the information to be presented to the user, thus reducing visual clutter and allowing the analyst to observe relevant patterns in the data. The algorithms to construct such visualizations, and the interaction mechanisms supported, inspired by traditional image processing techniques such as grayscale manipulation and thresholding are also presented. We also illustrate how such algorithms can assist users to effectively identify clusters in very noisy large data sets
infovis-2004-12	Clutter Reduction in Multi-Dimensional Data Visualization Using Dimension Reordering. Visual clutter denotes a disordered collection of graphical entities in information visualization. Clutter can obscure the structure present in the data. Even in a small dataset, clutter can make it hard for the viewer to find patterns, relationships and structure. In this paper, we define visual clutter as any aspect of the visualization that interferes with the viewer's understanding of the data, and present the concept of clutter-based dimension reordering. Dimension order is an attribute that can significantly affect a visualization's expressiveness. By varying the dimension order in a display, it is possible to reduce clutter without reducing information content or modifying the data in any way. Clutter reduction is a display-dependent task. In this paper, we follow a three-step procedure for four different visualization techniques. For each display technique, first, we determine what constitutes clutter in terms of display properties; then we design a metric to measure visual clutter in this display; finally we search for an order that minimizes the clutter in a display
infovis-2004-13	Time-Varying Data Visualization using Information Flocking Boids. This research demonstrates how principles of self-organization and behavior simulation can be used to represent dynamic data evolutions by extending the concept of information flocking, originally introduced by Proctor & Winter (1998), to time-varying datasets. A rule-based behavior system continuously controls and updates the dynamic actions of individual, three-dimensional elements that represent the changing data values of reoccurring data objects. As a result, different distinguishable motion types emerge that are driven by local interactions between the spatial elements as well as the evolution of time-varying data values. Notably, this representation technique focuses on the representation of dynamic data alteration characteristics, or how reoccurring data objects change over time, instead of depicting the exact data values themselves. In addition, it demonstrates the potential of motion as a useful information visualization cue. The original information flocking approach is extended to incorporate time-varying datasets, live database querying, continuous data streaming, real-time data similarity evaluation, automatic shape generation and more stable flocking algorithms. Different experiments prove that information flocking is capable of representing short-term events as well as long-term temporal data evolutions of both individual and groups of time-dependent data objects. An historical stock market quote price dataset is used to demonstrate the algorithms and principles of time-varying information flocking
infovis-2004-14	Artifacts of the Presence Era: Using Information Visualization to Create an Evocative Souvenir. We present Artifacts of the Presence Era, a digital installation that uses a geological metaphor to visualize the events in a physical space over time. The piece captures video and audio from a museum and constructs an impressionistic visualization of the evolving history in the space. Instead of creating a visualization tool for data analysis, we chose to produce a piece that functions as a souvenir of a particular time and place. We describe the design choices we made in creating this installation, the visualization techniques we developed, and the reactions we observed from users and the media. We suggest that the same approach can be applied to a more general set of visualization contexts, ranging from email archives to newsgroups conversations
infovis-2004-15	Paint Inspired Color Mixing and Compositing for Visualization. Color is often used to convey information, and color compositing is often required while visualizing multiattribute information. This paper proposes an alternative method for color compositing. In order to present understandable color blending to the general public, several techniques are proposed. First, a paint-inspired RYB color space is used. In addition, noise patterns are employed to produce subregions of pure color within an overlapped region. We show examples to demonstrate the effectiveness of our technique for visualization
infovis-2004-16	Expand-Ahead: A Space-Filling Strategy for Browsing Trees. Many tree browsers allow subtrees under a node to be collapsed or expanded, enabling the user to control screen space usage and selectively drill-down. However, explicit expansion of nodes can be tedious. Expand-ahead is a space-filling strategy by which some nodes are automatically expanded to fill available screen space, without expanding so far that nodes are shown at a reduced size or outside the viewport. This often allows a user exploring the tree to see further down the tree without the effort required in a traditional browser. It also means the user can sometimes drill-down a path faster, by skipping over levels of the tree that are automatically expanded for them. Expand-ahead differs from many detail-in-context techniques in that there is no scaling or distortion involved. We present 1D and 2D prototype implementations of expand-ahead, and identify various design issues and possible enhancements to our designs. Our prototypes support smooth, animated transitions between different views of a tree. We also present the results of a controlled experiment which show that, under certain conditions, users are able to drill-down faster with expand-ahead than without
infovis-2004-17	Evaluating a System for Interactive Exploration of Large, Hierarchically Structured Document Repositories. The InfoSky visual explorer is a system enabling users to interactively explore large, hierarchically structured document collections. Similar to a real-world telescope, InfoSky employs a planar graphical representation with variable magnification. Documents of similar content are placed close to each other and displayed as stars, while collections of documents at a particular level in the hierarchy are visualised as bounding polygons. Usability testing of an early prototype implementation of InfoSky revealed several design issues which prevented users from fully exploiting the power of the visual metaphor. Evaluation results have been incorporated into an advanced prototype, and another usability test has been conducted. A comparison of test results demonstrates enhanced system performance and points out promising directions for further work
infovis-2004-18	Metric-Based Network Exploration and Multiscale Scatterplot. We describe an exploratory technique based on the direct interaction with a 2D modified scatterplot computed from two different metrics calculated over the elements of a network. The scatterplot is transformed into an image by applying standard image processing techniques resulting into blurring effects. Segmentation of the image allow to easily select patches on the image as a way to extract subnetworks. We were inspired by the work of Wattenberg and Fisher [M. Wattenberg et al. (2003)] showing that the blurring process builds into a multiscale perceptual scheme, making this type of interaction intuitive to the user. We explain how the exploration of the network can be guided by the visual analysis of the blurred scatterplot and by its possible interpretations
infovis-2004-19	BEST PAPER: A Knowledge Task-Based Framework for Design and Evaluation of Information Visualizations. The design and evaluation of most current information visualization systems descend from an emphasis on a user's ability to "unpack" the representations of data of interest and operate on them independently. Too often, successful decision-making and analysis are more a matter of serendipity and user experience than of intentional design and specific support for such tasks; although humans have considerable abilities in analyzing relationships from data, the utility of visualizations remains relatively variable across users, data sets, and domains. In this paper, we discuss the notion of analytic gaps, which represent obstacles faced by visualizations in facilitating higher-level analytic tasks, such as decision-making and learning. We discuss support for bridging the analytic gap, propose a framework for design and evaluation of information visualization systems, and demonstrate its use
infovis-2004-20	Rethinking Visualization: A High-Level Taxonomy. We present the novel high-level visualization taxonomy. Our taxonomy classifies visualization algorithms rather than data. Algorithms are categorized based on the assumptions they make about the data being visualized; we call this set of assumptions the design model. Because our taxonomy is based on design models, it is more flexible than existing taxonomies and considers the user's conceptual model, emphasizing the human aspect of visualization. Design models are classified according to whether they are discrete or continuous and by how much the algorithm designer chooses display attributes such as spatialization, timing, colour, and transparency. This novel approach provides an alternative view of the visualization field that helps explain how traditional divisions (e.g., information and scientific visualization) relates and overlap, and that may inspire research ideas in hybrid visualization areas
infovis-2004-21	Building Highly-Coordinated Visualizations in Improvise. Improvise is a fully-implemented system in which users build and browse multiview visualizations interactively using a simple shared-object coordination mechanism coupled with a flexible, expression-based visual abstraction language. By coupling visual abstraction with coordination, users gain precise control over how navigation and selection in the visualization affects the appearance of data in individual views. As a result, it is practical to build visualizations with more views and richer coordination in Improvise than in other visualization systems. Building and browsing activities are integrated in a single, live user interface that lets users alter visualizations quickly and incrementally during data exploration
infovis-2004-22	The InfoVis Toolkit. This article presents the InfoVis toolkit, designed to support the creation, extension and integration of advanced 2D information visualization components into interactive Java swing applications. The InfoVis toolkit provides specific data structures to achieve a fast action/feedback loop required by dynamic queries. It comes with a large set of components such as range sliders and tailored control panels required to control and configure the visualizations. These components are integrated into a coherent framework that simplifies the management of rich data structures and the design and extension of visualizations. Supported data structures currently include tables, trees and graphs. Supported visualizations include scatter plots, time series, parallel coordinates, treemaps, icicle trees, node-link diagrams for trees and graphs and adjacency matrices for graphs. All visualizations can use fisheye lenses and dynamic labeling. The InfoVis toolkit supports hardware acceleration when available through Agile2D, an implementation of the Java graphics API based on OpenGL, achieving speedups of 10 to 200 times. The article also shows how new visualizations can be added and extended to become components, enriching visualizations as well as general applications
infovis-2004-23	Topological Fisheye Views for Visualizing Large Graphs. Graph drawing is a basic visualization tool. For graphs of up to hundreds of nodes and edges, there are many effective techniques available. At greater scale, data density and occlusion problems often negate its effectiveness. Conventional pan-and-zoom, and multiscale and geometric fisheye views are not fully satisfactory solutions to this problem. As an alternative, we describe a topological zooming method. It is based on the precomputation of a hierarchy of coarsened graphs, which are combined on the fly into renderings with the level of detail dependent on the distance from one or more foci. We also discuss a related distortion method that allows our technique to achieve constant information density displays
infovis-2004-24	Matrix Zoom: A Visual Interface to Semi-external Graphs. In Web data, telecommunications traffic and in epidemiological studies, dense subgraphs correspond to subsets of subjects (i.e. users, patients) that share a collection of attributes values (i.e. accessed Web pages, email-calling patterns or disease diagnostic profiles). Visual and computational identification of these "clusters" becomes useful when domain experts desire to determine those factors of major influence in the formation of access and communication clusters or in the detection and contention of disease spread. With the current increases in graphic hardware capabilities and RAM sizes, it is more useful to relate graph sizes to the available screen real estate S and the amount of available RAM M, instead of the number of edges or nodes in the graph. We offer a visual interface that is parameterized by M and S and is particularly suited for navigation tasks that require the identification of subgraphs whose edge density is above certain threshold. This is achieved by providing a zoomable matrix view of the underlying data. This view is strongly coupled to a hierarchical view of the essential information elements present in the data domain. We illustrate the applicability of this work to the visual navigation of cancer incidence data and to an aggregated sample of phone call traffic
infovis-2004-25	Dynamic Drawing of Clustered Graphs. This paper presents an algorithm for drawing a sequence of graphs that contain an inherent grouping of their vertex set into clusters. It differs from previous work on dynamic graph drawing in the emphasis that is put on maintaining the clustered structure of the graph during incremental layout. The algorithm works online and allows arbitrary modifications to the graph. It is generic and can be implemented using a wide range of static force-directed graph layout tools. The paper introduces several metrics for measuring layout quality of dynamic clustered graphs. The performance of our algorithm is analyzed using these metrics. The algorithm has been successfully applied to visualizing mobile object software
infovis-2004-26	Interactive Visualization of Small World Graphs. Many real world graphs have small world characteristics, that is, they have a small diameter compared to the number of nodes and exhibit a local cluster structure. Examples are social networks, software structures, bibliographic references and biological neural nets. Their high connectivity makes both finding a pleasing layout and a suitable clustering hard. In this paper we present a method to create scalable, interactive visualizations of small world graphs, allowing the user to inspect local clusters while maintaining a global overview of the entire structure. The visualization method uses a combination of both semantical and geometrical distortions, while the layout is generated by a spring embedder algorithm using recently developed force model. We use a cross referenced database of 500 artists as a running example
infovis-2004-27	Non-Euclidean Spring Embedders. We present a method by which force-directed algorithms for graph layouts can be generalized to calculate the layout of a graph in an arbitrary Riemannian geometry. The method relies on extending the Euclidean notions of distance, angle, and force-interactions to smooth nonEuclidean geometries via projections to and from appropriately chosen tangent spaces. In particular, we formally describe the calculations needed to extend such algorithms to hyperbolic and spherical geometries
infovis-2005-01	Baby Names, Visualization, and Social Data Analysis. The Name Voyager, a Web based visualization of historical trends in baby naming, has proven remarkably popular. This paper discusses the interaction techniques it uses for smooth visual exploration of thousands of time series. We also describe design decisions behind the application and lessons learned in creating an application that makes do-it-yourself data mining popular. The prime lesson, it is hypothesized, is that an information visualization tool may be fruitfully viewed not as a tool but as part of an online social environment. In other words, to design a successful exploratory data analysis tool, one good strategy is to create a system that enables "social" data analysis
infovis-2005-02	A Sky Dome Visualisation for Identification of Astronomical Orientations. <p>It has long been known that ancient temples were frequently oriented along the cardinal directions or to certain points along the horizon where Sun or Moon rise or set on special days of the year. In the last decades, archaeologists have found evidence of even older building structures buried in the soil, with doorways that also appear to have distinct orientations.</p> <p>This paper presents a novel diagram combining archaeological maps with a folded-apart, flattened view of the whole sky, showing the local horizon and the daily paths of sun, moon and brighter stars. By use of this diagram, interesting groupings of astronomical orientation directions, e.g. to certain sunrise and sunset points could be identified, which were evidently used to mark certain days of the year. Orientations to a few significant stars very likely indicated the beginning of the agricultural year in the middle neolithic period.</p>
infovis-2005-03	Interactive Visualization of Genealogical Graphs. The general problem of visualizing "family trees", or genealogical graphs, in 2D, is considered. A graph theoretic analysis is given, which identifies why genealogical graphs can be difficult to draw. This motivates some novel graphical representations, including one based on a dual-tree, a subgraph formed by the union of two trees. Dual-trees can be drawn in various styles, including an indented outline style, and allow users to browse general multitrees in addition to genealogical graphs, by transitioning between different dual-tree views. A software prototype for such browsing is described, that supports smoothly animated transitions, automatic camera framing, rotation of subtrees, and a novel interaction technique for expanding or collapsing subtrees to any depth with a single mouse drag.
infovis-2005-04	The Visual Code Navigator: An Interactive Toolset for Source Code Investigation. We present the Visual Code Navigator, a set of three interrelated visual tools that we developed for exploring large source code software projects from three different perspectives, or views: the syntactic view shows the syntactic constructs in the source code. The symbol view shows the objects a file makes available after compilation, such as function signatures, variables, and namespaces. The evolution view looks at different versions in a project lifetime of a number of selected source files. The views share one code model, which combines hierarchical syntax based and line based information from multiple source files versions. We render this code model using a visual model that extends the pixel-filling, space partitioning properties of shaded cushion treemaps with novel techniques. We discuss how our views allow users to interactively answer complex questions on various code elements by simple mouse clicks. We validate the efficiency and effectiveness of our toolset by an informal user study on the source code of VTK, a large, industry-size C++ code base
infovis-2005-05	Vizster: Visualizing Online Social Networks. Recent years have witnessed the dramatic popularity of online social networking services, in which millions of members publicly articulate mutual "friendship" relations. Guided by ethnographic research of these online communities, we have designed and implemented a visualization system for playful end-user exploration and navigation of large-scale online social networks. Our design builds upon familiar node-link network layouts to contribute customized techniques for exploring connectivity in large graph structures, supporting visual search and analysis, and automatically identifying and visualizing community structures. Both public installation and controlled studies of the system provide evidence of the system's usability, capacity for facilitating discovery, and potential for fun and engaged social activity.
infovis-2005-06	PRISAD: A Partitioned Rendering Infrastructure for Scalable Accordion Drawing. <p>We present PRISAD, the first generic rendering infrastructure for information visualization applications that use the accordion drawing technique: rubber-sheet navigation with guaranteed visibility for marked areas of interest. Our new rendering algorithms are based on the partitioning of screen-space, which allows us to handle dense dataset regions correctly. The algorithms in previous work led to incorrect visual representations because of overculling, and to inefficiencies due to overdrawing multiple items in the same region. Our pixel-based drawing infrastructure guarantees correctness by eliminating overculling, and improves rendering performance with tight bounds on overdrawing.</p> <p>PRITree and PRISeq are applications built on PRISAD, with the feature sets of TreeJuxtaposer and SequenceJuxtaposer, respectively. We describe our PRITree and PRISeq dataset traversal algorithms, which are used for efficient rendering, culling, and layout of datasets within the PRISAD framework. We also discuss PRITree node marking techniques, which offer order-of-magnitude improvements to both memory and time performance versus previous range storage and retrieval techniques. Our PRITree implementation features a five-fold increase in rendering speed for non-trivial tree structures, and also reduces memory requirements in some realworld datasets by up to eight times, so we are able to handle trees of several million nodes. PRISeq renders fifteen times faster and handles datasets twenty times larger than previous work.</p>
infovis-2005-07	Voronoi Treemaps. Treemaps are a well-known method for the visualization of attributed hierarchical data. Previously proposed Treemap layout algorithms are limited to rectangular shapes, which causes problems with the aspect ratio of the rectangles as well as with identifying the visualized hierarchical structure. The approach of Voronoi Treemaps presented in this paper eliminates these problems through enabling subdivisions of and in polygons. Additionally, this allows for creating Treemap visualizations within areas of arbitrary shape, such as triangles and circles, thereby enabling a more flexible adaptation of Treemaps for a wider range of applications.
infovis-2005-08	Elastic Hierarchies: Combining Treemaps and Node-Link Diagrams. We investigate the use of elastic hierarchies for representing trees, where a single graphical depiction uses a hybrid mixture, or "interleaving", of more basic forms at different nodes of the tree. In particular, we explore combinations of node link and treemap forms, to combine the space efficiency of treemaps with the structural clarity of node link diagrams. A taxonomy is developed to characterize the design space of such hybrid combinations. A software prototype is described, which we used to explore various techniques for visualizing, browsing and interacting with elastic hierarchies, such as side by side overview and detail views, highlighting and rubber banding across views, visualization of multiple foci, and smooth animations across transitions. The paper concludes with a discussion of the characteristics of elastic hierarchies and suggestions for research on their properties and uses.
infovis-2005-09	Dig-CoLa: Directed Graph Layout through Constrained Energy Minimization. We describe a new method for visualization of directed graphs. The method combines constraint programming techniques with a high performance force-directed placement (FDP) algorithm so that the directed nature of the graph is highlighted while useful properties of FDP -such as emphasis of symmetries and preservation of proximity relations - are retained. Our algorithm automatically identi- fies those parts of the digraph that contain hierarchical information and draws them accordingly. Additionally, those parts that do not contain hierarchy are drawn at the same quality expected from a non-hierarchical, undirected layout algorithm. An interesting application of our algorithm is directional multidimensional scaling (DMDS). DMDS deals with low-dimensional embedding of multivariate data where we want to emphasize the overall flow in the data (e.g. chronological progress) along one of the axes.
infovis-2005-10	Dynamic visualization of graphs with extended labels. The paper describes a novel technique to visualize graphs with extended node and link labels. The lengths of these labels range from a short phrase to a full sentence to an entire paragraph and beyond. Our solution is different from all the existing approaches that almost always rely on intensive computational effort to optimize the label placement problem. Instead, we share the visualization resources with the graph and present the label information in static, interactive, and dynamic modes without the requirement for tackling the intractability issues. This allows us to reallocate the computational resources for dynamic presentation of real time information. The paper includes a user study to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the visualization technique.
infovis-2005-11	An Evaluation of Content Browsing Techniques for Hierarchical Space-Filling Visualizations. Space-filling visualizations, such as the TreeMap, are well suited for displaying the properties of nodes in hierarchies. To browse the contents of the hierarchy, the primary mode of interaction is by drilling down through many successive layers. In this paper we introduce a distortion algorithm based on fisheye and continuous zooming techniques for browsing data in the TreeMap representation. The motivation behind the distortion approach is for assisting users to rapidly browse information displayed in the TreeMap without opening successive layers of the hierarchy. Two experiments were conducted to evaluate the new approach. In the first experiment (N=20) the distortion approach is compared to the drill down method. Results show that subjects are quicker and more accurate in locating targets of interest using the distortion method. The second experiment (N=12) evaluates the effectiveness of the two approaches in a task requiring context, we define as the context browsing task. The results show that subjects are quicker and more accurate in locating targets with the distortion technique in the context browsing task.
infovis-2005-12	Turning the Bucket of Text into a Pipe. Many visual analysis tools operate on a fixed set of data. However, professional information analysts follow issues over a period of time and need to be able to easily add new documents to an ongoing exploration. Some analysts handle documents in a moving window of time, with new documents constantly added and old ones aging out. This paper describes both the user interaction and the technical implementation approach for a visual analysis system designed to support constantly evolving text collections.
infovis-2005-13	Visual Correlation for Situational Awareness. <p>We present a novel visual correlation paradigm for situational awareness (SA) and suggest its usage in a diverse set of applications that require a high level of SA. Our approach is based on a concise and scalable representation, which leads to a flexible visualization tool that is both clear and intuitive to use. Situational awareness is the continuous extraction of environmental information, its integration with previous knowledge to form a coherent mental picture, and the use of that picture in anticipating future events.</p> <p>In this paper we build on our previous work on visualization for network intrusion detection and show how that approach can be generalized to encompass a much broader class of SA systems. We first propose a generalization that is based on what we term, the w3premise, namely that each event must have have at least the What, When and Where attributes. We also present a second generalization, which increases flexibility and facilitates complex visual correlations. Finally, we demonstrate the generality of our approaches by applying our visualization paradigm in a collection of diverse SA areas.</p>
infovis-2005-14	Highlighting Conflict Dynamics in Event Data. We present a method for visual summary of bilateral conflict structures embodied in event data. Such data consists of actors linked by time stamped events, and may be extracted from various sources such as news reports and dossiers. When analyzing political events, it is of particular importance to be able to recognize conflicts and actors involved in them. By projecting actors into a conflict space, we are able to highlight the main opponents in a series of tens of thousands of events, and provide a graphic overview of the conflict structure. Moreover, our method allows for smooth animation of the dynamics of a conflict.
infovis-2005-15	Low-Level Components of Analytic Activity in Information Visualization. Existing system level taxonomies of visualization tasks are geared more towards the design of particular representations than the facilitation of user analytic activity. We present a set of ten low level analysis tasks that largely capture people's activities while employing information visualization tools for understanding data. To help develop these tasks, we collected nearly 200 sample questions from students about how they would analyze five particular data sets from different domains. The questions, while not being totally comprehensive, illustrated the sheer variety of analytic questions typically posed by users when employing information visualization systems. We hope that the presented set of tasks is useful for information visualization system designers as a kind of common substrate to discuss the relative analytic capabilities of the systems. Further, the tasks may provide a form of checklist for system designers.
infovis-2005-16	Simple 3D glyphs for spatial multivariate data. We present an effort to evaluate the possible utility of a new type of 3D glyphs intended for visualizations of multivariate spatial data. They are based on results from vision research suggesting that our perception of metric 3D structure is distorted and imprecise relative to the actual scene before us (e.g., "metric 3D structure in visualizations" by M. Lind et al. (2003)); only a class of qualitative properties of the scene is perceived with accuracy. These properties are best characterized as being invariant over affine but not Euclidean transformations. They are related, but not identical to, the non-accidental properties (NAPs) described by Lowe in "perceptual organization and visual recognition" (1984) on which the notion of geons is based in "recognition by components - a theory of image understanding" by I. Biederman (1987). A large number of possible 3D glyphs for the visualization of spatial data can be constructed using such properties. One group is based on the local sign of surface curvature. We investigated these properties in a visualization experiment. The results are promising and the implications for visualization are discussed.
infovis-2005-17	Revealing structure within clustered parallel coordinates displays. In order to gain insight into multivariate data, complex structures must be analysed and understood. Parallel coordinates is an excellent tool for visualizing this type of data but has its limitations. This paper deals with one of its main limitations - how to visualize a large number of data items without hiding the inherent structure they constitute. We solve this problem by constructing clusters and using high-precision textures to represent them. We also use transfer functions that operate on the high-precision textures in order to highlight different aspects of the cluster characteristics. Providing pre-defined transfer functions as well as the support to draw customized transfer functions makes it possible to extract different aspects of the data. We also show how feature animation can be used as guidance when simultaneously analysing several clusters. This technique makes it possible to visually represent statistical information about clusters and thus guides the user, making the analysis process more efficient.
infovis-2005-18	Parallel Sets: Visual Analysis of Categorical Data. <p>The discrete nature of categorical data makes it a particular challenge for visualization. Methods that work very well for continuous data are often hardly usable with categorical dimensions. Only few methods deal properly with such data, mostly because of the discrete nature of categorical data, which does not translate well into the continuous domains of space and color.</p> <p>Parallel Sets is a new visualization method that adopts the layout of parallel coordinates, but substitutes the individual data points by a frequency-based representation. This abstracted view, combined with a set of carefully designed interactions, supports visual data analysis of large and complex data sets. The technique allows ef- ficient work with meta data, which is particularly important when dealing with categorical datasets. By creating new dimensions from existing ones, for example, the user can filter the data according to his or her current needs.</p> <p>We also present the results from an interactive analysis of CRM data using Parallel Sets. We demonstrate how the flexible layout eases the process of knowledge crystallization, especially when combined with a sophisticated interaction scheme.</p>
infovis-2005-19	Multivariate Glyphs for Multi-Object Clusters. Aggregating items can simplify the display of huge quantities of data values at the cost of losing information about the attribute values of the individual items. We propose a distribution glyph, in both two- and three-dimensional forms, which specifically addresses the concept of how the aggregated data is distributed over the possible range of values. It is capable of displaying distribution, variability and extent information for up to four attributes at a time of multivariate, clustered data. User studies validate the concept, showing that both glyphs are just as good as raw data and the 3D glyph is better for answering some questions.
infovis-2005-20	An Interactive 3D Integration of Parallel Coordinates and Star Glyphs. Parallel Coordinates are a powerful method for visualizing multidimensional data but, when applied to large data sets, they become cluttered and difficult to read. Star Glyphs, on the other hand, can be used to display either the attributes of a data item or the values across all items for a single attribute. Star Glyphs may readily provide a quick impression; however, since the full data set will require multiple glyphs, overall readings are more difficult. We present Parallel Glyphs, an interactive integration of the visual representations of Parallel Coordinates and Star Glyphs that utilizes the advantages of both representations to offset the disadvantages they have separately. We discuss the role of uniform and stepped colour scales in the visual comparison of non-adjacent items and Star Glyphs. Parallel Glyphs provide capabilities for focus-in-context exploration using two types of lenses and interactions specific to the 3D space.
infovis-2005-21	Graph-Theoretic Scagnostics. We introduce Tukey and Tukey scagnostics and develop graph-theoretic methods for implementing their procedure on large datasets.
infovis-2005-22	Visualizing Coordination in Situ. <p>Exploratory visualization environments allow users to build and browse coordinated multiview visualizations interactively. As the number of views and amount of coordination increases, conceptualizing coordination structure becomes more and more important for successful data exploration.</p> <p>Integrated metavisualization is exploratory visualization of coordination and other interactive structure directly inside a visualization's own user interface. This paper presents a model of integrated metavisualization, describes the problem of capturing dynamic interface structure as visualizable data, and outlines three general approaches to integration. Metavisualization has been implemented in Improvise, using views, lenses, and embedding to reveal the the dynamic structure of its own highly-coordinated visualizations.</p>
infovis-2005-23	Two-Tone Pseudo Coloring: Compact Visualization for One-Dimensional Data. A new pseudo coloring technique for large scale one-dimensional datasets is proposed. For visualization of a large scale dataset, user interaction is indispensable for selecting focus areas in the dataset. However, excessive switching of the visualized image makes it difficult for the user to recognize overview/ detail and detail/ detail relationships. The goal of this research is to develop techniques for visualizing details as precisely as possible in overview display. In this paper, visualization of a one-dimensional but very large dataset is considered. The proposed method is based on pseudo coloring, however, each scalar value corresponds to two discrete colors. By painting with two colors at each value, users can read out the value precisely. This method has many advantages: it requires little image space for visualization; both the overview and details of the dataset are visible in one image without distortion; and implementation is very simple. Several application examples, such as meteorological observation data and train convenience evaluation data, show the effectiveness of the method.
infovis-2005-24	A Note on Space-Filling Visualizations and Space-Filling Curves. A recent line of treemap research has focused on layout algorithms that optimize properties such as stability, preservation of ordering information, and aspect ratio of rectangles. No ideal treemap layout algorithm has been found, and so it is natural to explore layouts that produce non-rectangular regions. This note describes a connection between space-filling visualizations and the mathematics of space-filling curves, and uses that connection to characterize a family of layout algorithms which produce nonrectangular regions but enjoy geometric continuity under changes to the data and legibility even for highly unbalanced trees.
infovis-2005-25	An Optimization-based Approach to Dynamic Visual Context Management. We are building an intelligent multimodal conversation system to aid users in exploring large and complex data sets. To tailor to diverse user queries introduced during a conversation, we automate the generation of system responses, including both spoken and visual outputs. In this paper, we focus on the problem of visual context management, a process that dynamically updates an existing visual display to effectively incorporate new information requested by subsequent user queries. Specifically, we develop an optimization based approach to visual context management. Compared to existing approaches, which normally handle predictable visual context updates, our work offers two unique contributions. First, we provide a general computational framework that can effectively manage a visual context for diverse, unanticipated situations encountered in a user system conversation. Moreover, we optimize the satisfaction of both semantic and visual constraints, which otherwise are difficult to balance using simple heuristics. Second, we present an extensible representation model that uses feature based metrics to uniformly define all constraints. We have applied our work to two different applications and our evaluation has shown the promise of this work.
infovis-2005-26	Adapting the Cognitive Walkthrough Method to Assess the Usability of a Knowledge Domain Visualization. The usability of knowledge domain visualization (KDViz) tools can be assessed at several levels. Cognitive walkthrough (CW) is a well known usability inspection method that focuses on how easily users can learn software through exploration. Typical applications of CW follow structured tasks where user goals and action sequences that lead to achievement of the goals are well defined. KDViz and other information visualization tools, however, are typically designed for users to explore data and user goals and actions are less well understood. In this paper, we describe how the traditional CW method may be adapted for assessing the usability of these systems. We apply the adapted version of CW to CiteSpace, a KDViz tool that uses bibliometric analyses to create visualizations of scientific literatures. We describe usability issues identified by the adapted CW and discuss how CiteSpace supported the completion of tasks, such as identifying research fronts, and the achievement of goals. Finally, we discuss improvements to the adapted CW and issues to be addressed before applying it to a wider range of KDViz tools.
infovis-2005-27	Importance-Driven Visualization Layouts for Large Time Series Data. <p>Time series are an important type of data with applications in virtually every aspect of the real world. Often a large number of time series have to be monitored and analyzed in parallel. Sets of time series may show intrinsic hierarchical relationships and varying degrees of importance among the individual time series. Effective techniques for visually analyzing large sets of time series should encode the relative importance and hierarchical ordering of the time series data by size and position, and should also provide a high degree of regularity in order to support comparability by the analyst.</p> <p>In this paper, we present a framework for visualizing large sets of time series. Based on the notion of inter time series importance relationships, we define a set of objective functions that space-filling layout schemes for time series data should obey. We develop an efficient algorithm addressing the identified problems by generating layouts that reflect hierarchyand importance-based relationships in a regular layout with favorable aspect ratios. We apply our technique to a number of real-world data sets including sales and stock data, and we compare our technique with an aspect ratio aware variant of the well-known TreeMap algorithm. The examples show the advantages and practical usefulness of our layout algorithm.</p>
infovis-2005-28	Temporal Visualization of Planning Polygons for Efficient Partitioning of Geo-Spatial Data. Partitioning of geo-spatial data for efficient allocation of resources such as schools and emergency health care services is driven by a need to provide better and more effective services. Partitioning of spatial data is a complex process that depends on numerous factors such as population, costs incurred in deploying or utilizing resources and target capacity of a resource. Moreover, complex data such as population distributions are dynamic i.e. they may change over time. Simple animation may not effectively show temporal changes in spatial data. We propose the use of three temporal visualization techniques - wedges, rings and time slices - to display the nature of change in temporal data in a single view. Along with maximizing resource utilization and minimizing utilization costs, a partition should also ensure the long-term effectiveness of the plan. We use multi-attribute visualization techniques to highlight the strengths and identify the weaknesses of a partition. Comparative visualization techniques allow multiple partitions to be viewed simultaneously. Users can make informed decisions about how to partition geo-spatial data by using a combination of our techniques for multi-attribute visualization, temporal visualization and comparative visualization.
infovis-2005-29	Flow Map Layout. Cartographers have long used flow maps to show the movement of objects from one location to another, such as the number of people in a migration, the amount of goods being traded, or the number of packets in a network. The advantage of flow maps is that they reduce visual clutter by merging edges. Most flow maps are drawn by hand and there are few computer algorithms available. We present a method for generating flow maps using hierarchical clustering given a set of nodes, positions, and flow data between the nodes. Our techniques are inspired by graph layout algorithms that minimize edge crossings and distort node positions while maintaining their relative position to one another. We demonstrate our technique by producing flow maps for network traffic, census data, and trade data.
infovis-2005-30	Visualization of Graphs with Associated Timeseries Data. The most common approach to support analysis of graphs with associated time series data include: overlay of data on graph vertices for one timepoint at a time by manipulating a visual property (e.g. color) of the vertex, along with sliders or some such mechanism to animate the graph for other timepoints. Alternatively, data from all the timepoints can be overlaid simultaneously by embedding small charts into graph vertices. These graph visualizations may also be linked to other visualizations (e.g., parallel co-ordinates) using brushing and linking. This paper describes a study performed to evaluate and rank graph+timeseries visualization options based on users' performance time and accuracy of responses on predefined tasks. The results suggest that overlaying data on graph vertices one timepoint at a time may lead to more accurate performance for tasks involving analysis of a graph at a single timepoint, and comparisons between graph vertices for two distinct timepoints. Overlaying data simultaneously for all the timepoints on graph vertices may lead to more accurate and faster performance for tasks involving searching for outlier vertices displaying different behavior than the rest of the graph vertices for all timepoints. Single views have advantage over multiple views on tasks that require topological information. Also, the number of attributes displayed on nodes has a non trivial influence on accuracy of responses, whereas the number of visualizations affect the performance time.
infovis-2005-31	Interactive Sankey Diagrams. <p>We present a system that allows users to interactively explore complex flow scenarios represented as Sankey diagrams. Our system provides an overview of the flow graph and allows users to zoom in and explore details on demand. The support for quantitative flow tracing across the flow graph as well as representations at different levels of detail facilitate the understanding of complex flow situations.</p> <p>The energy flow in a city serves as a sample scenario for our system. Different forms of energy are distributed within the city and they are transformed into heat, electricity, or other forms of energy. These processes are visualized and interactively explored. In addition our system can be used as a planning tool for the exploration of alternative scenarios by interactively manipulating different parameters in the energy flow network.</p>
infovis-2006-01	ASK-GraphView: A Large Scale Graph Visualization System. We describe ASK-GraphView, a node-link-based graph visualization system that allows clustering and interactive navigation of large graphs, ranging in size up to 16 million edges. The system uses a scalable architecture and a series of increasingly sophisticated clustering algorithms to construct a hierarchy on an arbitrary, weighted undirected input graph. By lowering the interactivity requirements we can scale to substantially bigger graphs. The user is allowed to navigate this hierarchy in a top down manner by interactively expanding individual clusters. ASK-GraphView also provides facilities for filtering and coloring, annotation and cluster labeling.
infovis-2006-02	MatrixExplorer: a Dual-Representation System to Explore Social Networks. MatrixExplorer is a network visualization system that uses two representations: node-link diagrams and matrices. Its design comes from a list of requirements formalized after several interviews and a participatory design session conducted with social science researchers. Although matrices are commonly used in social networks analysis, very few systems support the matrix-based representations to visualize and analyze networks. MatrixExplorer provides several novel features to support the exploration of social networks with a matrix-based representation, in addition to the standard interactive filtering and clustering functions. It provides tools to reorder (layout) matrices, to annotate and compare findings across different layouts and find consensus among several clusterings. MatrixExplorer also supports Node-link diagram views which are familiar to most users and remain a convenient way to publish or communicate exploration results. Matrix and node-link representations are kept synchronized at all stages of the exploration process.
infovis-2006-03	Visual Analysis of Multivariate State Transition Graphs. We present a new approach for the visual analysis of state transition graphs. We deal with multivariate graphs where a number of attributes are associated with every node. Our method provides an interactive attribute-based clustering facility. Clustering results in metric, hierarchical and relational data, represented in a single visualization. To visualize hierarchically structured quantitative data, we introduce a novel technique: the bar tree. We combine this with a node-link diagram to visualize the hierarchy and an arc diagram to visualize relational data. Our method enables the user to gain significant insight into large state transition graphs containing tens of thousands of nodes. We illustrate the effectiveness of our approach by applying it to a real-world use case. The graph we consider models the behavior of an industrial wafer stepper and contains 55,043 nodes and 289,443 edges.
infovis-2006-04	Balancing Systematic and Flexible Exploration of Social Networks. Social network analysis (SNA) has emerged as a powerful method for understanding the importance of relationships in networks. However, interactive exploration of networks is currently challenging because: (1) it is difficult to find patterns and comprehend the structure of networks with many nodes and links, and (2) current systems are often a medley of statistical methods and overwhelming visual output which leaves many analysts uncertain about how to explore in an orderly manner. This results in exploration that is largely opportunistic. Our contributions are techniques to help structural analysts understand social networks more effectively. We present SocialAction, a system that uses attribute ranking and coordinated views to help users systematically examine numerous SNA measures. Users can (1) flexibly iterate through visualizations of measures to gain an overview, filter nodes, and find outliers, (2) aggregate networks using link structure, find cohesive subgroups, and focus on communities of interest, and (3) untangle networks by viewing different link types separately, or find patterns across different link types using a matrix overview. For each operation, a stable node layout is maintained in the network visualization so users can make comparisons. SocialAction offers analysts a strategy beyond opportunism, as it provides systematic, yet flexible, techniques for exploring social networks.
infovis-2006-05	Multi-Scale Banking to 45 Degrees. In his text Visualizing Data, William Cleveland demonstrates how the aspect ratio of a line chart can affect an analyst's perception of trends in the data. Cleveland proposes an optimization technique for computing the aspect ratio such that the average absolute orientation of line segments in the chart is equal to 45 degrees. This technique, called banking to 45deg, is designed to maximize the discriminability of the orientations of the line segments in the chart. In this paper, we revisit this classic result and describe two new extensions. First, we propose alternate optimization criteria designed to further improve the visual perception of line segment orientations. Second, we develop multi-scale banking, a technique that combines spectral analysis with banking to 45deg. Our technique automatically identifies trends at various frequency scales and then generates a banked chart for each of these scales. We demonstrate the utility of our techniques in a range of visualization tools and analysis examples.
infovis-2006-06	Measuring Data Abstraction Quality in Multiresolution Visualizations. Data abstraction techniques are widely used in multiresolution visualization systems to reduce visual clutter and facilitate analysis from overview to detail. However, analysts are usually unaware of how well the abstracted data represent the original dataset, which can impact the reliability of results gleaned from the abstractions. In this paper, we define two data abstraction quality measures for computing the degree to which the abstraction conveys the original dataset: the histogram difference measure and the nearest neighbor measure. They have been integrated within XmdvTool, a public-domain multiresolution visualization system for multivariate data analysis that supports sampling as well as clustering to simplify data. Several interactive operations are provided, including adjusting the data abstraction level, changing selected regions, and setting the acceptable data abstraction quality level. Conducting these operations, analysts can select an optimal data abstraction level. Also, analysts can compare different abstraction methods using the measures to see how well relative data density and outliers are maintained, and then select an abstraction method that meets the requirement of their analytic tasks.
infovis-2006-07	Enabling Automatic Clutter Reduction in Parallel Coordinate Plots. We have previously shown that random sampling is an effective clutter reduction technique and that a sampling lens can facilitate focus+context viewing of particular regions. This demands an efficient method of estimating the overlap or occlusion of large numbers of intersecting lines in order to automatically adjust the sampling rate within the lens. This paper proposes several ways for measuring occlusion in parallel coordinate plots. An empirical study into the accuracy and efficiency of the occlusion measures show that a probabilistic approach combined with a 'binning' technique is very fast and yet approaches the accuracy of the more expensive 'true' complete measurement.
infovis-2006-08	Topographic Visualization of Prefix Propagation in the Internet. We propose a new metaphor for the visualization of prefixes propagation in the Internet. Such a metaphor is based on the concept of topographic map and allows to put in evidence the relative importance of the Internet Service Providers (ISPs) involved in the routing of the prefix. Based on the new metaphor we propose an algorithm for computing layouts and experiment with such algorithm on a test suite taken from the real Internet. The paper extends the visualization approach of the BGPlay service, which is an Internet routing monitoring tool widely used by ISP operators.
infovis-2006-09	Network Visualization by Semantic Substrates. Networks have remained a challenge for information visualization designers because of the complex issues of node and link layout coupled with the rich set of tasks that users present. This paper offers a strategy based on two principles: (1) layouts are based on user-defined semantic substrates, which are non-overlapping regions in which node placement is based on node attributes, (2) users interactively adjust sliders to control link visibility to limit clutter and thus ensure comprehensibility of source and destination. Scalability is further facilitated by user control of which nodes are visible. We illustrate our semantic substrates approach as implemented in NVSS 1.0 with legal precedent data for up to 1122 court cases in three regions with 7645 legal citations.
infovis-2006-10	Hierarchical Edge Bundles: Visualization of Adjacency Relations in Hierarchical Data. A compound graph is a frequently encountered type of data set. Relations are given between items, and a hierarchy is defined on the items as well. We present a new method for visualizing such compound graphs. Our approach is based on visually bundling the adjacency edges, i.e., non-hierarchical edges, together. We realize this as follows. We assume that the hierarchy is shown via a standard tree visualization method. Next, we bend each adjacency edge, modeled as a B-spline curve, toward the polyline defined by the path via the inclusion edges from one node to another. This hierarchical bundling reduces visual clutter and also visualizes implicit adjacency edges between parent nodes that are the result of explicit adjacency edges between their respective child nodes. Furthermore, hierarchical edge bundling is a generic method which can be used in conjunction with existing tree visualization techniques. We illustrate our technique by providing example visualizations and discuss the results based on an informal evaluation provided by potential users of such visualizations.
infovis-2006-11	Visualization of Geo-spatial Point Sets via Global Shape Transformation and Local Pixel Placement. In many applications, data is collected and indexed by geo-spatial location. Discovering interesting patterns through visualization is an important way of gaining insight about such data. A previously proposed approach is to apply local placement functions such as PixelMaps that transform the input data set into a solution set that preserves certain constraints while making interesting patterns more obvious and avoid data loss from overplotting. In experience, this family of spatial transformations can reveal fine structures in large point sets, but it is sometimes difficult to relate those structures to basic geographic features such as cities and regional boundaries. Recent information visualization research has addressed other types of transformation functions that make spatially-transformed maps with recognizable shapes. These types of spatial-transformation are called global shape functions. In particular, cartogram-based map distortion has been studied. On the other hand, cartogram-based distortion does not handle point sets readily. In this study, we present a framework that allows the user to specify a global shape function and a local placement function. We combine cartogram-based layout (global shape) with PixelMaps (local placement), obtaining some of the benefits of each toward improved exploration of dense geo-spatial data sets.
infovis-2006-12	Worldmapper: the world as you've never seen it before. This paper describes the Worldmapper project, which makes use of novel visualization techniques to represent a broad variety of social and economic data about the countries of the world. The goal of the project is to use the map projections known as cartograms to depict comparisons and relations between different territories, and its execution raises many interesting design challenges that were not all apparent at the outset. We discuss the approaches taken towards these challenges, some of which may have considerably broad application. We conclude by commenting on the positive initial response to the Worldmapper images published on the Web, which we believe is due, at least in part, to the particular effectiveness of the cartogram as a tool for communicating quantitative geographic data.
infovis-2006-13	Spatial Analysis of News Sources. People in different places talk about different things. This interest distribution is reflected by the newspaper articles circulated in a particular area. We use data from our large-scale newspaper analysis system (Lydia) to make entity datamaps, a spatial visualization of the interest in a given named entity. Our goal is to identify entities which display regional biases. We develop a model of estimating the frequency of reference of an entity in any given city from the reference frequency centered in surrounding cities, and techniques for evaluating the spatial significance of this distribution.
infovis-2006-14	Dynamic Map Labeling. We address the problem of filtering, selecting and placing labels on a dynamic map, which is characterized by continuous zooming and panning capabilities. This consists of two interrelated issues. The first is to avoid label popping and other artifacts that cause confusion and interrupt navigation, and the second is to label at interactive speed. In most formulations the static map labeling problem is NP-hard, and a fast approximation might have O(n log n) complexity. Even this is too slow during interaction, when the number of labels shown can be several orders of magnitude less than the number in the map. In this paper we introduce a set of desiderata for "consistent" dynamic map labeling, which has qualities desirable for navigation. We develop a new framework for dynamic labeling that achieves the desiderata and allows for fast interactive display by moving all of the selection and placement decisions into the preprocessing phase. This framework is general enough to accommodate a variety of selection and placement algorithms. It does not appear possible to achieve our desiderata using previous frameworks. Prior to this paper, there were no formal models of dynamic maps or of dynamic labels; our paper introduces both. We formulate a general optimization problem for dynamic map labeling and give a solution to a simple version of the problem. The simple version is based on label priorities and a versatile and intuitive class of dynamic label placements we call "invariant point placements". Despite these restrictions, our approach gives a useful and practical solution. Our implementation is incorporated into the G-Vis system which is a full-detail dynamic map of the continental USA. This demo is available through any browser.
infovis-2006-15	Visualization of Barrier Tree Sequences. Dynamical models that explain the formation of spatial structures of RNA molecules have reached a complexity that requires novel visualization methods that help to analyze the validity of these models. We focus on the visualization of so-called folding landscapes of a growing RNA molecule. Folding landscapes describe the energy of a molecule as a function of its spatial configuration; thus they are huge and high dimensional. Their most salient features, however, are encapsulated by their so-called barrier tree that reflects the local minima and their connecting saddle points. For each length of the growing RNA chain there exists a folding landscape. We visualize the sequence of folding landscapes by an animation of the corresponding barrier trees. To generate the animation, we adapt the foresight layout with tolerance algorithm for general dynamic graph layout problems. Since it is very general, we give a detailed description of each phase: constructing a supergraph for the trees, layout of that supergraph using a modified DOT algorithm, and presentation techniques for the final animation.
infovis-2006-16	Visualizing Business Data with Generalized Treemaps. Business data is often presented using simple business graphics. These familiar visualizations are effective for providing overviews, but fall short for the presentation of large amounts of detailed information. Treemaps can provide such detail, but are often not easy to understand. We present how standard treemap algorithms can be adapted such that the results mimic familiar business graphics. Specifically, we present the use of different layout algorithms per level, a number of variations of the squarified algorithm, the use of variable borders, and the use of non-rectangular shapes. The combined use of these leads to histograms, pie chars, and a variety of other styles.
infovis-2006-17	FacetMap: A Scalable Search and Browse Visualization. The dominant paradigm for searching and browsing large data stores is text-based: presenting a scrollable list of search results in response to textual search term input. While this works well for the Web, there is opportunity for improvement in the domain of personal information stores, which tend to have more heterogeneous data and richer metadata. In this paper, we introduce FacetMap, an interactive, query-driven visualization, generalizable to a wide range of metadata-rich data stores. FacetMap uses a visual metaphor for both input (selection of metadata facets as filters) and output. Results of a user study provide insight into tradeoffs between FacetMap's graphical approach and the traditional text-oriented approach.
infovis-2006-18	Visual Exploration of Complex Time-Varying Graphs. Many graph drawing and visualization algorithms, such as force-directed layout and line-dot rendering, work very well on relatively small and sparse graphs. However, they often produce extremely tangled results and exhibit impractical running times for highly non-planar graphs with large edge density. And very few graph layout algorithms support dynamic time-varying graphs; applying them independently to each frame produces distracting temporally incoherent visualizations. We have developed a new visualization technique based on a novel approach to hierarchically structuring dense graphs via stratification. Using this structure, we formulate a hierarchical force-directed layout algorithm that is both efficient and produces quality graph layouts. The stratification of the graph also allows us to present views of the data that abstract away many small details of its structure. Rather than displaying all edges and nodes at once, resulting in a convoluted rendering, we present an interactive tool that filters edges and nodes using the graph hierarchy and allows users to drill down into the graph for details. Our layout algorithm also accommodates time-varying graphs in a natural way, producing a temporally coherent animation that can be used to analyze and extract trends from dynamic graph data. For example, we demonstrate the use of our method to explore financial correlation data for the U.S. stock market in the period from 1990 to 2005. The user can easily analyze the time-varying correlation graph of the market, uncovering information such as market sector trends, representative stocks for portfolio construction, and the interrelationship of stocks over time.
infovis-2006-19	Smashing Peacocks Further:  Drawing Quasi-Trees from Biconnected Components. Quasi-trees, namely graphs with tree-like structure, appear in many application domains, including bioinformatics and computer networks. Our new SPF approach exploits the structure of these graphs with a two-level approach to drawing, where the graph is decomposed into a tree of biconnected components. The low-level biconnected components are drawn with a force-directed approach that uses a spanning tree skeleton as a starting point for the layout. The higher-level structure of the graph is a true tree with meta-nodes of variable size that contain each biconnected component. That tree is drawn with a new area-aware variant of a tree drawing algorithm that handles high-degree nodes gracefully, at the cost of allowing edge-node overlaps. SPF performs an order of magnitude faster than the best previous approaches, while producing drawings of commensurate or improved quality.
infovis-2006-20	IPSep-CoLa: An Incremental Procedure for Separation Constraint Layout of Graphs. We extend the popular force-directed approach to network (or graph) layout to allow separation constraints, which enforce a minimum horizontal or vertical separation between selected pairs of nodes. This simple class of linear constraints is expressive enough to satisfy a wide variety of application-specific layout requirements, including: layout of directed graphs to better show flow; layout with non-overlapping node labels; and layout of graphs with grouped nodes (called clusters). In the stress majorization force-directed layout process, separation constraints can be treated as a quadratic programming problem. We give an incremental algorithm based on gradient projection for efficiently solving this problem. The algorithm is considerably faster than using generic constraint optimization techniques and is comparable in speed to unconstrained stress majorization. We demonstrate the utility of our technique with sample data from a number of practical applications including gene-activation networks, terrorist networks and visualization of high-dimensional data.
infovis-2006-21	User Interaction with Scatterplots on Small Screens - A Comparative Evaluation of Geometric-Semantic Zoom and Fisheye Distortion. Existing information-visualization techniques that target small screens are usually limited to exploring a few hundred items. In this article we present a scatterplot tool for Personal Digital Assistants that allows the handling of many thousands of items. The application's scalability is achieved by incorporating two alternative interaction techniques: a geometric-semantic zoom that provides smooth transition between overview and detail, and a fisheye distortion that displays the focus and context regions of the scatterplot in a single view. A user study with 24 participants was conducted to compare the usability and efficiency of both techniques when searching a book database containing 7500 items. The study was run on a pen-driven Wacom board simulating a PDA interface. While the results showed no significant difference in task-completion times, a clear majority of 20 users preferred the fisheye view over the zoom interaction. In addition, other dependent variables such as user satisfaction and subjective rating of orientation and navigation support revealed a preference for the fisheye distortion. These findings partly contradict related research and indicate that, when using a small screen, users place higher value on the ability to preserve navigational context than they do on the ease of use of a simplistic, metaphor-based interaction style.
infovis-2006-22	The Perceptual Scalability of Visualization. Larger, higher resolution displays can be used to increase the scalability of information visualizations. But just how much can scalability increase using larger displays before hitting human perceptual or cognitive limits? Are the same visualization techniques that are good on a single monitor also the techniques that are best when they are scaled up using large, high-resolution displays? To answer these questions we performed a controlled experiment on user performance time, accuracy, and subjective workload when scaling up data quantity with different space-time-attribute visualizations using a large, tiled display. Twelve college students used small multiples, embedded bar matrices, and embedded time-series graphs either on a 2 megapixel (Mp) display or with data scaled up using a 32 Mp tiled display. Participants performed various overview and detail tasks on geospatially-referenced multidimensional time-series data. Results showed that current designs are perceptually scalable because they result in a decrease in task completion time when normalized per number of data attributes along with no decrease in accuracy. It appears that, for the visualizations selected for this study, the relative comparison between designs is generally consistent between display sizes. However, results also suggest that encoding is more important on a smaller display while spatial grouping is more important on a larger display. Some suggestions for designers are provided based on our experience designing visualizations for large displays.
infovis-2006-23	Complex Logarithmic Views for Small Details in Large Contexts. Commonly known detail in context techniques for the two-dimensional Euclidean space enlarge details and shrink their context using mapping functions that introduce geometrical compression. This makes it difficult or even impossible to recognize shapes for large differences in magnification factors. In this paper we propose to use the complex logarithm and the complex root functions to show very small details even in very large contexts. These mappings are conformal, which means they only locally rotate and scale, thus keeping shapes intact and recognizable. They allow showing details that are orders of magnitude smaller than their surroundings in combination with their context in one seamless visualization. We address the utilization of this universal technique for the interaction with complex two-dimensional data considering the exploration of large graphs and other examples.
infovis-2006-24	Software Design Patterns for Information Visualization. Despite a diversity of software architectures supporting information visualization, it is often difficult to identify, evaluate, and re-apply the design solutions implemented within such frameworks. One popular and effective approach for addressing such difficulties is to capture successful solutions in design patterns, abstract descriptions of interacting software components that can be customized to solve design problems within a particular context. Based upon a review of existing frameworks and our own experiences building visualization software, we present a series of design patterns for the domain of information visualization. We discuss the structure, context of use, and interrelations of patterns spanning data representation, graphics, and interaction. By representing design knowledge in a reusable form, these patterns can be used to facilitate software design, implementation, and evaluation, and improve developer education and communication.
infovis-2007-01	Visual Analysis of Network Traffic for Resource Planning, Interactive Monitoring, and Interpretation of Security Threats. The Internet has become a wild place: malicious code is spread on personal computers across the world, deploying botnets ready to attack the network infrastructure. The vast number of security incidents and other anomalies overwhelms attempts at manual analysis, especially when monitoring service provider backbone links. We present an approach to interactive visualization with a case study indicating that interactive visualization can be applied to gain more insight into these large data sets. We superimpose a hierarchy on IP address space, and study the suitability of Treemap variants for each hierarchy level. Because viewing the whole IP hierarchy at once is not practical for most tasks, we evaluate layout stability when eliding large parts of the hierarchy, while maintaining the visibility and ordering of the data of interest.
infovis-2007-02	AdaptiviTree: Adaptive Tree Visualization for Tournament-Style Brackets. Online pick'em games, such as the recent NCAA college basketball March Madness tournament, form a large and rapidly growing industry. In these games, players make predictions on a tournament bracket that defines which competitors play each other and how they proceed toward a single champion. Throughout the course of the tournament, players monitor the brackets to track progress and to compare predictions made by multiple players. This is often a complex sense making task. The classic bracket visualization was designed for use on paper and utilizes an incrementally additive system in which the winner of each match-up is rewritten in the next round as the tournament progresses. Unfortunately, this representation requires a significant amount of space and makes it relatively difficult to get a quick overview of the tournament state since competitors take arbitrary paths through the static bracket. In this paper, we present AdaptiviTree, a novel visualization that adaptively deforms the representation of the tree and uses its shape to convey outcome information. AdaptiviTree not only provides a more compact and understandable representation, but also allows overlays that display predictions as well as other statistics. We describe results from a lab study we conducted to explore the efficacy of AdaptiviTree, as well as from a deployment of the system in a recent real-world sports tournament.
infovis-2007-03	Many Eyes: A Site for Visualization at Internet Scale. We describe the design and deployment of Many Eyes, a public Web site where users may upload data, create interactive visualizations, and carry on discussions. The goal of the site is to support collaboration around visualizations at a large scale by fostering a social style of data analysis in which visualizations not only serve as a discovery tool for individuals but also as a medium to spur discussion among users. To support this goal, the site includes novel mechanisms for end-user creation of visualizations and asynchronous collaboration around those visualizations. In addition to describing these technologies, we provide a preliminary report on the activity of our users.
infovis-2007-04	Scented Widgets: Improving Navigation Cues with Embedded Visualizations. This paper presents scented widgets, graphical user interface controls enhanced with embedded visualizations that facilitate navigation in information spaces. We describe design guidelines for adding visual cues to common user interface widgets such as radio buttons, sliders, and combo boxes and contribute a general software framework for applying scented widgets within applications with minimal modifications to existing source code. We provide a number of example applications and describe a controlled experiment which finds that users exploring unfamiliar data make up to twice as many unique discoveries using widgets imbued with social navigation data. However, these differences equalize as familiarity with the data increases.
infovis-2007-05	Show Me: Automatic Presentation for Visual Analysis. This paper describes Show Me, an integrated set of user interface commands and defaults that incorporate automatic presentation into a commercial visual analysis system called Tableau. A key aspect of Tableau is VizQL, a language for specifying views, which is used by Show Me to extend automatic presentation to the generation of tables of views (commonly called small multiple displays). A key research issue for the commercial application of automatic presentation is the user experience, which must support the flow of visual analysis. User experience has not been the focus of previous research on automatic presentation. The Show Me user experience includes the automatic selection of mark types, a command to add a single field to a view, and a pair of commands to build views for multiple fields. Although the use of these defaults and commands is optional, user interface logs indicate that Show Me is used by commercial users.
infovis-2007-06	Casual Information Visualization: Depictions of Data in Everyday Life. Information visualization has often focused on providing deep insight for expert user populations and on techniques for amplifying cognition through complicated interactive visual models. This paper proposes a new subdomain for infovis research that complements the focus on analytic tasks and expert use. Instead of work-related and analytically driven infovis, we propose casual information visualization (or casual infovis) as a complement to more traditional infovis domains. Traditional infovis systems, techniques, and methods do not easily lend themselves to the broad range of user populations, from expert to novices, or from work tasks to more everyday situations. We propose definitions, perspectives, and research directions for further investigations of this emerging subfield. These perspectives build from ambient information visualization (Skog et al., 2003), social visualization, and also from artistic work that visualizes information (Viegas and Wattenberg, 2007). We seek to provide a perspective on infovis that integrates these research agendas under a coherent vocabulary and framework for design. We enumerate the following contributions. First, we demonstrate how blurry the boundary of infovis is by examining systems that exhibit many of the putative properties of infovis systems, but perhaps would not be considered so. Second, we explore the notion of insight and how, instead of a monolithic definition of insight, there may be multiple types, each with particular characteristics. Third, we discuss design challenges for systems intended for casual audiences. Finally we conclude with challenges for system evaluation in this emerging subfield.
infovis-2007-07	Visualizing the History of Living Spaces. The technology available to building designers now makes it possible to monitor buildings on a very large scale. Video cameras and motion sensors are commonplace in practically every office space, and are slowly making their way into living spaces. The application of such technologies, in particular video cameras, while improving security, also violates privacy. On the other hand, motion sensors, while being privacy-conscious, typically do not provide enough information for a human operator to maintain the same degree of awareness about the space that can be achieved by using video cameras. We propose a novel approach in which we use a large number of simple motion sensors and a small set of video cameras to monitor a large office space. In our system we deployed 215 motion sensors and six video cameras to monitor the 3,000-square-meter office space occupied by 80 people for a period of about one year. The main problem in operating such systems is finding a way to present this highly multidimensional data, which includes both spatial and temporal components, to a human operator to allow browsing and searching recorded data in an efficient and intuitive way. In this paper we present our experiences and the solutions that we have developed in the course of our work on the system. We consider this work to be the first step in helping designers and managers of building systems gain access to information about occupants' behavior in the context of an entire building in a way that is only minimally intrusive to the occupants' privacy.
infovis-2007-08	Geographically Weighted Visualization: Interactive Graphics for Scale-Varying Exploratory Analysis. We introduce a series of geographically weighted (GW) interactive graphics, or geowigs, and use them to explore spatial relationships at a range of scales. We visually encode information about geographic and statistical proximity and variation in novel ways through gw-choropleth maps, multivariate gw-boxplots, gw-shading and scalograms. The new graphic types reveal information about GW statistics at several scales concurrently. We impement these views in prototype software containing dynamic links and GW interactions that encourage exploration and refine them to consider directional geographies. An informal evaluation uses interactive GW techniques to consider Guerry's dataset of 'moral statistics', casting doubt on correlations originally proposed through visual analysis, revealing new local anomalies and suggesting multivariate geographic relationships. Few attempts at visually synthesising geography with multivariate statistical values at multiple scales have been reported. The geowigs proposed here provide informative representations of multivariate local variation, particularly when combined with interactions that coordinate views and result in gw-shading. We argue that they are widely applicable to area and point-based geographic data and provide a set of methods to support visual analysis using GW statistics through which the effects of geography can be explored at multiple scales.
infovis-2007-09	Legible Cities: Focus-Dependent Multi-Resolution Visualization of Urban Relationships. Numerous systems have been developed to display large collections of data for urban contexts; however, most have focused on layering of single dimensions of data and manual calculations to understand relationships within the urban environment. Furthermore, these systems often limit the user's perspectives on the data, thereby diminishing the user's spatial understanding of the viewing region. In this paper, we introduce a highly interactive urban visualization tool that provides intuitive understanding of the urban data. Our system utilizes an aggregation method that combines buildings and city blocks into legible clusters, thus providing continuous levels of abstraction while preserving the user's mental model of the city. In conjunction with a 3D view of the urban model, a separate but integrated information visualization view displays multiple disparate dimensions of the urban data, allowing the user to understand the urban environment both spatially and cognitively in one glance. For our evaluation, expert users from various backgrounds viewed a real city model with census data and confirmed that our system allowed them to gain more intuitive and deeper understanding of the urban model from different perspectives and levels of abstraction than existing commercial urban visualization systems.
infovis-2007-10	Interactive Visual Exploration of a Large Spatio-Temporal Dataset: Reflections on a Geovisualization Mashup. Exploratory visual analysis is useful for the preliminary investigation of large structured, multifaceted spatio-temporal datasets. This process requires the selection and aggregation of records by time, space and attribute, the ability to transform data and the flexibility to apply appropriate visual encodings and interactions. We propose an approach inspired by geographical 'mashups' in which freely-available functionality and data are loosely but flexibly combined using de facto exchange standards. Our case study combines MySQL, PHP and the LandSerf GIS to allow Google Earth to be used for visual synthesis and interaction with encodings described in KML. This approach is applied to the exploration of a log of 1.42 million requests made of a mobile directory service. Novel combinations of interaction and visual encoding are developed including spatial 'tag clouds', 'tag maps', 'data dials' and multi-scale density surfaces. Four aspects of the approach are informally evaluated: the visual encodings employed, their success in the visual exploration of the dataset, the specific tools used and the 'mashup' approach. Preliminary findings will be beneficial to others considering using mashups for visualization. The specific techniques developed may be more widely applied to offer insights into the structure of multifarious spatio-temporal data of the type explored here.
infovis-2007-11	Hotmap: Looking at Geographic Attention. Understanding how people use online maps allows data acquisition teams to concentrate their efforts on the portions of the map that are most seen by users. Online maps represent vast databases, and so it is insufficient to simply look at a list of the most-accessed URLs. Hotmap takes advantage of the design of a mapping system's imagery pyramid to superpose a heatmap of the log files over the original maps. Users' behavior within the system can be observed and interpreted. This paper discusses the imagery acquisition task that motivated Hotmap, and presents several examples of information that Hotmap makes visible. We discuss the design choices behind Hotmap, including logarithmic color schemes; low-saturation background images; and tuning images to explore both infrequently-viewed and frequently-viewed spaces.
infovis-2007-12	VisLink: Revealing Relationships Amongst Visualizations. We present VisLink, a method by which visualizations and the relationships between them can be interactively explored. VisLink readily generalizes to support multiple visualizations, empowers inter-representational queries, and enables the reuse of the spatial variables, thus supporting efficient information encoding and providing for powerful visualization bridging. Our approach uses multiple 2D layouts, drawing each one in its own plane. These planes can then be placed and re-positioned in 3D space: side by side, in parallel, or in chosen placements that provide favoured views. Relationships, connections, and patterns between visualizations can be revealed and explored using a variety of interaction techniques including spreading activation and search filters.
infovis-2007-13	Visualization of Heterogeneous Data. Both the resource description framework (RDF), used in the semantic web, and Maya Viz u-forms represent data as a graph of objects connected by labeled edges. Existing systems for flexible visualization of this kind of data require manual specification of the possible visualization roles for each data attribute. When the schema is large and unfamiliar, this requirement inhibits exploratory visualization by requiring a costly up-front data integration step. To eliminate this step, we propose an automatic technique for mapping data attributes to visualization attributes. We formulate this as a schema matching problem, finding appropriate paths in the data model for each required visualization attribute in a visualization template.
infovis-2007-14	Sequential Document Visualization. Documents and other categorical valued time series are often characterized by the frequencies of short range sequential patterns such as n-grams. This representation converts sequential data of varying lengths to high dimensional histogram vectors which are easily modeled by standard statistical models. Unfortunately, the histogram representation ignores most of the medium and long range sequential dependencies making it unsuitable for visualizing sequential data. We present a novel framework for sequential visualization of discrete categorical time series based on the idea of local statistical modeling. The framework embeds categorical time series as smooth curves in the multinomial simplex summarizing the progression of sequential trends. We discuss several visualization techniques based on the above framework and demonstrate their usefulness for document visualization.
infovis-2007-15	A Taxonomy of Clutter Reduction for Information Visualisation. Information visualisation is about gaining insight into data through a visual representation. This data is often multivariate and increasingly, the datasets are very large. To help us explore all this data, numerous visualisation applications, both commercial and research prototypes, have been designed using a variety of techniques and algorithms. Whether they are dedicated to geo-spatial data or skewed hierarchical data, most of the visualisations need to adopt strategies for dealing with overcrowded displays, brought about by too much data to fit in too small a display space. This paper analyses a large number of these clutter reduction methods, classifying them both in terms of how they deal with clutter reduction and more importantly, in terms of the benefits and losses. The aim of the resulting taxonomy is to act as a guide to match techniques to problems where different criteria may have different importance, and more importantly as a means to critique and hence develop existing and new techniques.
infovis-2007-16	Toward a Deeper Understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information Visualization. Even though interaction is an important part of information visualization (Infovis), it has garnered a relatively low level of attention from the Infovis community. A few frameworks and taxonomies of Infovis interaction techniques exist, but they typically focus on low-level operations and do not address the variety of benefits interaction provides. After conducting an extensive review of Infovis systems and their interactive capabilities, we propose seven general categories of interaction techniques widely used in Infovis: 1) Select, 2) Explore, 3) Reconfigure, 4) Encode, 5) Abstract/Elaborate, 6) Filter, and 7) Connect. These categories are organized around a user's intent while interacting with a system rather than the low-level interaction techniques provided by a system. The categories can act as a framework to help discuss and evaluate interaction techniques and hopefully lay an initial foundation toward a deeper understanding and a science of interaction.
infovis-2007-17	Interactive Tree Comparison for Co-located Collaborative Information Visualization. In many domains, increased collaboration has lead to more innovation by fostering the sharing of knowledge, skills, and ideas. Shared analysis of information visualizations does not only lead to increased information processing power, but team members can also share, negotiate, and discuss their views and interpretations on a dataset and contribute unique perspectives on a given problem. Designing technologies to support collaboration around information visualizations poses special challenges and relatively few systems have been designed. We focus on supporting small groups collaborating around information visualizations in a co-located setting, using a shared interactive tabletop display. We introduce an analysis of challenges and requirements for the design of co-located collaborative information visualization systems. We then present a new system that facilitates hierarchical data comparison tasks for this type of collaborative work. Our system supports multi-user input, shared and individual views on the hierarchical data visualization, flexible use of representations, and flexible workspace organization to facilitate group work around visualizations.
infovis-2007-18	Animated Transitions in Statistical Data Graphics. In this paper we investigate the effectiveness of animated transitions between common statistical data graphics such as bar charts, pie charts, and scatter plots. We extend theoretical models of data graphics to include such transitions, introducing a taxonomy of transition types. We then propose design principles for creating effective transitions and illustrate the application of these principles in DynaVis, a visualization system featuring animated data graphics. Two controlled experiments were conducted to assess the efficacy of various transition types, finding that animated transitions can significantly improve graphical perception.
infovis-2007-19	Browsing Zoomable Treemaps: Structure-Aware Multi-Scale Navigation Techniques. Treemaps provide an interesting solution for representing hierarchical data. However, most studies have mainly focused on layout algorithms and paid limited attention to the interaction with treemaps. This makes it difficult to explore large data sets and to get access to details, especially to those related to the leaves of the trees. We propose the notion of zoomable treemaps (ZTMs), an hybridization between treemaps and zoomable user interfaces that facilitates the navigation in large hierarchical data sets. By providing a consistent set of interaction techniques, ZTMs make it possible for users to browse through very large data sets (e.g., 700,000 nodes dispatched amongst 13 levels). These techniques use the structure of the displayed data to guide the interaction and provide a way to improve interactive navigation in treemaps.
infovis-2007-20	Visualizing Causal Semantics using Animations. Michotte's theory of ampliation suggests that causal relationships are perceived by objects animated under appropriate spatiotemporal conditions. We extend the theory of ampliation and propose that the immediate perception of complex causal relations is also dependent on a set of structural and temporal rules. We designed animated representations, based on Michotte's rules, for showing complex causal relationships or causal semantics. In this paper we describe a set of animations for showing semantics such as causal amplification, causal strength, causal dampening, and causal multiplicity. In a two part study we compared the effectiveness of both the static and animated representations. The first study (N=44) asked participants to recall passages that were previously displayed using both types of representations. Participants were 8% more accurate in recalling causal semantics when they were presented using animations instead of static graphs. In the second study (N=112) we evaluated the intuitiveness of the representations. Our results showed that while users were as accurate with the static graphs as with the animations, they were 9% faster in matching the correct causal statements in the animated condition. Overall our results show that animated diagrams that are designed based on perceptual rules such as those proposed by Michotte have the potential to facilitate comprehension of complex causal relations.
infovis-2007-21	Spatialization Design: Comparing Points and Landscapes. Spatializations represent non-spatial data using a spatial layout similar to a map. We present an experiment comparing different visual representations of spatialized data, to determine which representations are best for a non-trivial search and point estimation task. Primarily, we compare point-based displays to 2D and 3D information landscapes. We also compare a colour (hue) scale to a grey (lightness) scale. For the task we studied, point-based spatializations were far superior to landscapes, and 2D landscapes were superior to 3D landscapes. Little or no benefit was found for redundantly encoding data using colour or greyscale combined with landscape height. 3D landscapes with no colour scale (height-only) were particularly slow and inaccurate. A colour scale was found to be better than a greyscale for all display types, but a greyscale was helpful compared to height-only. These results suggest that point-based spatializations should be chosen over landscape representations, at least for tasks involving only point data itself rather than derived information about the data space.
infovis-2007-22	Weaving Versus Blending: a quantitative assessment of the information carrying capacities of two alternative methods for conveying multivariate data with color. In many applications, it is important to understand the individual values of, and relationships between, multiple related scalar variables defined across a common domain. Several approaches have been proposed for representing data in these situations. In this paper we focus on strategies for the visualization of multivariate data that rely on color mixing. In particular, through a series of controlled observer experiments, we seek to establish a fundamental understanding of the information-carrying capacities of two alternative methods for encoding multivariate information using color: color blending and color weaving. We begin with a baseline experiment in which we assess participants' abilities to accurately read numerical data encoded in six different basic color scales defined in the L*a*b* color space. We then assess participants' abilities to read combinations of 2, 3, 4 and 6 different data values represented in a common region of the domain, encoded using either color blending or color weaving. In color blending a single mixed color is formed via linear combination of the individual values in L*a*b* space, and in color weaving the original individual colors are displayed side-by-side in a high frequency texture that fills the region. A third experiment was conducted to clarify some of the trends regarding the color contrast and its effect on the magnitude of the error that was observed in the second experiment. The results indicate that when the component colors are represented side-by-side in a high frequency texture, most participants' abilities to infer the values of individual components are significantly improved, relative to when the colors are blended. Participants' performance was significantly better with color weaving particularly when more than 2 colors were used, and even when the individual colors subtended only 3 minutes of visual angle in the texture. However, the information-carrying capacity of the color weaving approach has its limits. - - We found that participants' abilities to accurately interpret each of the individual components in a high frequency color texture typically falls off as the number of components increases from 4 to 6. We found no significant advantages, in either color blending or color weaving, to using color scales based on component hues thatare more widely separated in the L*a*b* color space. Furthermore, we found some indications that extra difficulties may arise when opponent hues are employed.
infovis-2007-23	Overview Use in Multiple Information Resolution Interfaces. In interfaces that provide multiple visual information resolutions (VIR), low-VIR overviews typically sacrifice visual details for display capacity, with the assumption that users can select regions of interest to examine at higher VI Rs. Designers can create low VIRs based on multi-level structure inherent in the data, but have little guidance with single-level data. To better guide design tradeoff between display capacity and visual target perceivability, we looked at overview use in two multiple-VIR interfaces with high-VIR displays either embedded within, or separate from, the overviews. We studied two visual requirements for effective overview and found that participants would reliably use the low-VIR overviews only when the visual targets were simple and had small visual spans. Otherwise, at least 20% chose to use the high-VIR view exclusively. Surprisingly, neither of the multiple-VIR interfaces provided performance benefits when compared to using the high-VIR view alone. However, we did observe benefits in providing side-by-side comparisons for target matching. We conjecture that the high cognitive load of multiple-VIR interface interactions, whether real or perceived, is a more considerable barrier to their effective use than was previously considered.
infovis-2007-24	Visualizing Changes of Hierarchical Data using Treemaps. While the treemap is a popular method for visualizing hierarchical data, it is often difficult for users to track layout and attribute changes when the data evolve over time. When viewing the treemaps side by side or back and forth, there exist several problems that can prevent viewers from performing effective comparisons. Those problems include abrupt layout changes, a lack of prominent visual patterns to represent layouts, and a lack of direct contrast to highlight differences. In this paper, we present strategies to visualize changes of hierarchical data using treemaps. A new treemap layout algorithm is presented to reduce abrupt layout changes and produce consistent visual patterns. Techniques are proposed to effectively visualize the difference and contrast between two treemap snapshots in terms of the map items' colors, sizes, and positions. Experimental data show that our algorithm can achieve a good balance in maintaining a treemap's stability, continuity, readability, and average aspect ratio. A software tool is created to compare treemaps and generate the visualizations. User studies show that the users can better understand the changes in the hierarchy and layout, and more quickly notice the color and size differences using our method.
infovis-2007-25	Exploring Multiple Trees through DAG Representations. We present a directed acyclic graph visualisation designed to allow interaction with a set of multiple classification trees, specifically to find overlaps and differences between groups of trees and individual trees. The work is motivated by the need to find a representation for multiple trees that has the space-saving property of a general graph representation and the intuitive parent-child direction cues present in individual representation of trees. Using example taxonomic data sets, we describe augmentations to the common barycenter DAG layout method that reveal shared sets of child nodes between common parents in a clearer manner. Other interactions such as displaying the multiple ancestor paths of a node when it occurs in several trees, and revealing intersecting sibling sets within the context of a single DAG representation are also discussed.
infovis-2007-26	NodeTrix: a Hybrid Visualization of Social Networks. The need to visualize large social networks is growing as hardware capabilities make analyzing large networks feasible and many new data sets become available. Unfortunately, the visualizations in existing systems do not satisfactorily resolve the basic dilemma of being readable both for the global structure of the network and also for detailed analysis of local communities. To address this problem, we present NodeTrix, a hybrid representation for networks that combines the advantages of two traditional representations: node-link diagrams are used to show the global structure of a network, while arbitrary portions of the network can be shown as adjacency matrices to better support the analysis of communities. A key contribution is a set of interaction techniques. These allow analysts to create a NodeTrix visualization by dragging selections to and from node-link and matrix forms, and to flexibly manipulate the NodeTrix representation to explore the dataset and create meaningful summary visualizations of their findings. Finally, we present a case study applying NodeTrix to the analysis of the InfoVis 2004 co-authorship dataset to illustrate the capabilities of NodeTrix as both an exploration tool and an effective means of communicating results. 
infovis-2007-27	Multi-Level Graph Layout on the GPU. This paper presents a new algorithm for force directed graph layout on the GPU. The algorithm, whose goal is to compute layouts accurately and quickly, has two contributions. The first contribution is proposing a general multi-level scheme, which is based on spectral partitioning. The second contribution is computing the layout on the GPU. Since the GPU requires a data parallel programming model, the challenge is devising a mapping of a naturally unstructured graph into a well-partitioned structured one. This is done by computing a balanced partitioning of a general graph. This algorithm provides a general multi-level scheme, which has the potential to be used not only for computation on the GPU, but also on emerging multi-core architectures. The algorithm manages to compute high quality layouts of large graphs in a fraction of the time required by existing algorithms of similar quality. An application for visualization of the topologies of ISP (Internet service provider) networks is presented.
infovis-2008-01	Rolling the Dice: Multidimensional Visual Exploration using Scatterplot Matrix Navigation. Scatterplots remain one of the most popular and widely-used visual representations for multidimensional data due to their simplicity, familiarity and visual clarity, even if they lack some of the flexibility and visual expressiveness of newer multidimensional visualization techniques. This paper presents new interactive methods to explore multidimensional data using scatterplots. This exploration is performed using a matrix of scatterplots that gives an overview of the possible configurations, thumbnails of the scatterplots, and support for interactive navigation in the multidimensional space. Transitions between scatterplots are performed as animated rotations in 3D space, somewhat akin to rolling dice. Users can iteratively build queries using bounding volumes in the dataset, sculpting the query from different viewpoints to become more and more refined. Furthermore, the dimensions in the navigation space can be reordered, manually or automatically, to highlight salient correlations and differences among them. An example scenario presents the interaction techniques supporting smooth and effortless visual exploration of multidimensional datasets.
infovis-2008-02	A Framework of Interaction Costs in Information Visualization. Interaction cost is an important but poorly understood factor in visualization design. We propose a framework of interaction costs inspired by Normanpsilas Seven Stages of Action to facilitate study. From 484 papers, we collected 61 interaction-related usability problems reported in 32 user studies and placed them into our framework of seven costs: (1) Decision costs to form goals; (2) system-power costs to form system operations; (3) Multiple input mode costs to form physical sequences; (4) Physical-motion costs to execute sequences; (5) Visual-cluttering costs to perceive state; (6) View-change costs to interpret perception; (7) State-change costs to evaluate interpretation. We also suggested ways to narrow the gulfs of execution (2-4) and evaluation (5-7) based on collected reports. Our framework suggests a need to consider decision costs (1) as the gulf of goal formation.
infovis-2008-03	Balloon Focus: a Seamless Multi-Focus+Context Method for Treemaps. The treemap is one of the most popular methods for visualizing hierarchical data. When a treemap contains a large number of items, inspecting or comparing a few selected items in a greater level of detail becomes very challenging. In this paper, we present a seamless multi-focus and context technique, called Balloon Focus, that allows the user to smoothly enlarge multiple treemap items served as the foci, while maintaining a stable treemap layout as the context. Our method has several desirable features. First, this method is quite general and can be used with different treemap layout algorithms. Second, as the foci are enlarged, the relative positions among all items are preserved. Third, the foci are placed in a way that the remaining space is evenly distributed back to the non-focus treemap items. When Balloon Focus enlarges the focus items to a maximum degree, the above features ensure that the treemap will maintain a consistent appearance and avoid any abrupt layout changes. In our algorithm, a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) is used to maintain the positional constraints, and an elastic model is employed to govern the placement of the treemap items. We demonstrate a treemap visualization system that integrates data query, manual focus selection, and our novel multi-focus+context technique, Balloon Focus, together. A user study was conducted. Results show that with Balloon Focus, users can better perform the tasks of comparing the values and the distribution of the foci.
infovis-2008-04	Multi-Focused Geospatial Analysis Using Probes. Traditional geospatial information visualizations often present views that restrict the user to a single perspective. When zoomed out, local trends and anomalies become suppressed and lost; when zoomed in for local inspection, spatial awareness and comparison between regions become limited. In our model, coordinated visualizations are integrated within individual probe interfaces, which depict the local data in user-defined regions-of-interest. Our probe concept can be incorporated into a variety of geospatial visualizations to empower users with the ability to observe, coordinate, and compare data across multiple local regions. It is especially useful when dealing with complex simulations or analyses where behavior in various localities differs from other localities and from the system as a whole. We illustrate the effectiveness of our technique over traditional interfaces by incorporating it within three existing geospatial visualization systems: an agent-based social simulation, a census data exploration tool, and an 3D GIS environment for analyzing urban change over time. In each case, the probe-based interaction enhances spatial awareness, improves inspection and comparison capabilities, expands the range of scopes, and facilitates collaboration among multiple users.
infovis-2008-05	Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for Information Visualization. Even though information visualization (InfoVis) research has matured in recent years, it is generally acknowledged that the field still lacks supporting, encompassing theories. In this paper, we argue that the distributed cognition framework can be used to substantiate the theoretical foundation of InfoVis. We highlight fundamental assumptions and theoretical constructs of the distributed cognition approach, based on the cognitive science literature and a real life scenario. We then discuss how the distributed cognition framework can have an impact on the research directions and methodologies we take as InfoVis researchers. Our contributions are as follows. First, we highlight the view that cognition is more an emergent property of interaction than a property of the human mind. Second, we argue that a reductionist approach to study the abstract properties of isolated human minds may not be useful in informing InfoVis design. Finally we propose to make cognition an explicit research agenda, and discuss the implications on how we perform evaluation and theory building.
infovis-2008-06	EMDialog: Bringing Information Visualization into the Museum. Digital information displays are becoming more common in public spaces such as museums, galleries, and libraries. However, the public nature of these locations requires special considerations concerning the design of information visualization in terms of visual representations and interaction techniques. We discuss the potential for, and challenges of, information visualization in the museum context based on our practical experience with EMDialog, an interactive information presentation that was part of the Emily Carr exhibition at the Glenbow Museum in Calgary. EMDialog visualizes the diverse and multi-faceted discourse about this Canadian artist with the goal to both inform and provoke discussion. It provides a visual exploration environment that offers interplay between two integrated visualizations, one for information access along temporal, and the other along contextual dimensions. We describe the results of an observational study we conducted at the museum that revealed the different ways visitors approached and interacted with EMDialog, as well as how they perceived this form of information presentation in the museum context. Our results include the need to present information in a manner sufficiently attractive to draw attention and the importance of rewarding passive observation as well as both short- and longer term information exploration.
infovis-2008-07	Graphical Histories for Visualization: Supporting Analysis, Communication, and Evaluation. Interactive history tools, ranging from basic undo and redo to branching timelines of user actions, facilitate iterative forms of interaction. In this paper, we investigate the design of history mechanisms for information visualization. We present a design space analysis of both architectural and interface issues, identifying design decisions and associated trade-offs. Based on this analysis, we contribute a design study of graphical history tools for Tableau, a database visualization system. These tools record and visualize interaction histories, support data analysis and communication of findings, and contribute novel mechanisms for presenting, managing, and exporting histories. Furthermore, we have analyzed aggregated collections of history sessions to evaluate Tableau usage. We describe additional tools for analyzing userspsila history logs and how they have been applied to study usage patterns in Tableau.
infovis-2008-08	Who Votes for What? A Visual Query Language for Opinion Data. Surveys and opinion polls are extremely popular in the media, especially in the months preceding a general election. However, the available tools for analyzing poll results often require specialized training. Hence, data analysis remains out of reach for many casual computer users. Moreover, the visualizations used to communicate the results of surveys are typically limited to traditional statistical graphics like bar graphs and pie charts, both of which are fundamentally noninteractive. We present a simple interactive visualization that allows users to construct queries on large tabular data sets, and view the results in real time. The results of two separate user studies suggest that our interface lowers the learning curve for naive users, while still providing enough analytical power to discover interesting correlations in the data.
infovis-2008-09	Visgets: Coordinated Visualizations for Web-based Information Exploration and Discovery. In common Web-based search interfaces, it can be difficult to formulate queries that simultaneously combine temporal, spatial, and topical data filters. We investigate how coordinated visualizations can enhance search and exploration of information on the World Wide Web by easing the formulation of these types of queries. Drawing from visual information seeking and exploratory search, we introduce VisGets -- interactive query visualizations of Web-based information that operate with online information within a Web browser. VisGets provide the information seeker with visual overviews of Web resources and offer a way to visually filter the data. Our goal is to facilitate the construction of dynamic search queries that combine filters from more than one data dimension. We present a prototype information exploration system featuring three linked VisGets (temporal, spatial, and topical), and used it to visually explore news items from online RSS feeds.
infovis-2008-10	Vispedia: Interactive Visual Exploration of Wikipedia Data via Search-Based Integration. Wikipedia is an example of the collaborative, semi-structured data sets emerging on the Web. These data sets have large, non-uniform schema that require costly data integration into structured tables before visualization can begin. We present Vispedia, a Web-based visualization system that reduces the cost of this data integration. Users can browse Wikipedia, select an interesting data table, then use a search interface to discover, integrate, and visualize additional columns of data drawn from multiple Wikipedia articles. This interaction is supported by a fast path search algorithm over DBpedia, a semantic graph extracted from Wikipedia's hyperlink structure. Vispedia can also export the augmented data tables produced for use in traditional visualization systems. We believe that these techniques begin to address the "long tail" of visualization by allowing a wider audience to visualize a broader class of data. We evaluated this system in a first-use formative lab study. Study participants were able to quickly create effective visualizations for a diverse set of domains, performing data integration as needed.
infovis-2008-11	The Word Tree, an Interactive Visual Concordance. We introduce the Word Tree, a new visualization and information-retrieval technique aimed at text documents. A Word Tree is a graphical version of the traditional "keyword-in-context" method, and enables rapid querying and exploration of bodies of text. In this paper we describe the design of the technique, along with some of the technical issues that arise in its implementation. In addition, we discuss the results of several months of public deployment of word trees on Many Eyes, which provides a window onto the ways in which users obtain value from the visualization.
infovis-2008-12	HiPP: A Novel Hierarchical Point Placement Strategy and its Application to the Exploration of Document Collections. Point placement strategies aim at mapping data points represented in higher dimensions to bi-dimensional spaces and are frequently used to visualize relationships amongst data instances. They have been valuable tools for analysis and exploration of data sets of various kinds. Many conventional techniques, however, do not behave well when the number of dimensions is high, such as in the case of documents collections. Later approaches handle that shortcoming, but may cause too much clutter to allow flexible exploration to take place. In this work we present a novel hierarchical point placement technique that is capable of dealing with these problems. While good grouping and separation of data with high similarity is maintained without increasing computation cost, its hierarchical structure lends itself both to exploration in various levels of detail and to handling data in subsets, improving analysis capability and also allowing manipulation of larger data sets.
infovis-2008-13	Particle-Based Labeling: Fast Point-Feature Labeling without Obscuring Other Visual Features. In many information visualization techniques, labels are an essential part to communicate the visualized data. To preserve the expressiveness of the visual representation, a placed label should neither occlude other labels nor visual representatives (e.g., icons, lines) that communicate crucial information. Optimal, non-overlapping labeling is an NP-hard problem. Thus, only a few approaches achieve a fast non-overlapping labeling in highly interactive scenarios like information visualization. These approaches generally target the point-feature label placement (PFLP) problem, solving only label-label conflicts. This paper presents a new, fast, solid and flexible 2D labeling approach for the PFLP problem that additionally respects other visual elements and the visual extent of labeled features. The results (number of placed labels, processing time) of our particle-based method compare favorably to those of existing techniques. Although the esthetic quality of non-real-time approaches may not be achieved with our method, it complies with practical demands and thus supports the interactive exploration of information spaces. In contrast to the known adjacent techniques, the flexibility of our technique enables labeling of dense point clouds by the use of non-occluding distant labels. Our approach is independent of the underlying visualization technique, which enables us to demonstrate the application of our labeling method within different information visualization scenarios.
infovis-2008-14	Stacked Graphs - Geometry & Aesthetics. In February 2008, the New York Times published an unusual chart of box office revenues for 7500 movies over 21 years. The chart was based on a similar visualization, developed by the first author, that displayed trends in music listening. This paper describes the design decisions and algorithms behind these graphics, and discusses the reaction on the Web. We suggest that this type of complex layered graph is effective for displaying large data sets to a mass audience. We provide a mathematical analysis of how this layered graph relates to traditional stacked graphs and to techniques such as ThemeRiver, showing how each method is optimizing a different ldquoenergy functionrdquo. Finally, we discuss techniques for coloring and ordering the layers of such graphs. Throughout the paper, we emphasize the interplay between considerations of aesthetics and legibility.
infovis-2008-15	Cerebral: Visualizing Multiple Experimental Conditions on a Graph with Biological Context. Systems biologists use interaction graphs to model the behavior of biological systems at the molecular level. In an iterative process, such biologists observe the reactions of living cells under various experimental conditions, view the results in the context of the interaction graph, and then propose changes to the graph model. These graphs serve as a form of dynamic knowledge representation of the biological system being studied and evolve as new insight is gained from the experimental data. While numerous graph layout and drawing packages are available, these tools did not fully meet the needs of our immunologist collaborators. In this paper, we describe the data information display needs of these immunologists and translate them into design decisions. These decisions led us to create Cerebral, a system that uses a biologically guided graph layout and incorporates experimental data directly into the graph display. Small multiple views of different experimental conditions and a data-driven parallel coordinates view enable correlations between experimental conditions to be analyzed at the same time that the data is viewed in the graph context. This combination of coordinated views allows the biologist to view the data from many different perspectives simultaneously. To illustrate the typical analysis tasks performed, we analyze two datasets using Cerebral. Based on feedback from our collaborators we conclude that Cerebral is a valuable tool for analyzing experimental data in the context of an interaction graph model.
infovis-2008-16	Viz-A-Vis: Toward Visualizing Video through Computer Vision. In the established procedural model of information visualization, the first operation is to transform raw data into data tables. The transforms typically include abstractions that aggregate and segment relevant data and are usually defined by a human, user or programmer. The theme of this paper is that for video, data transforms should be supported by low level computer vision. High level reasoning still resides in the human analyst, while part of the low level perception is handled by the computer. To illustrate this approach, we present Viz-A-Vis, an overhead video capture and access system for activity analysis in natural settings over variable periods of time. Overhead video provides rich opportunities for long-term behavioral and occupancy analysis, but it poses considerable challenges. We present initial steps addressing two challenges. First, overhead video generates overwhelmingly large volumes of video impractical to analyze manually. Second, automatic video analysis remains an open problem for computer vision.
infovis-2008-17	The Shaping of Information by Visual Metaphors. The nature of an information visualization can be considered to lie in the visual metaphors it uses to structure information. The process of understanding a visualization therefore involves an interaction between these external visual metaphors and the user's internal knowledge representations. To investigate this claim, we conducted an experiment to test the effects of visual metaphor and verbal metaphor on the understanding of tree visualizations. Participants answered simple data comprehension questions while viewing either a treemap or a node-link diagram. Questions were worded to reflect a verbal metaphor that was either compatible or incompatible with the visualization a participant was using. The results suggest that the visual metaphor indeed affects how a user derives information from a visualization. Additionally, we found that the degree to which a user is affected by the metaphor is strongly correlated with the user's ability to answer task questions correctly. These findings are a first step towards illuminating how visual metaphors shape user understanding, and have significant implications for the evaluation, application, and theory of visualization.
infovis-2008-18	Geometry-Based Edge Clustering for Graph Visualization. Graphs have been widely used to model relationships among data. For large graphs, excessive edge crossings make the display visually cluttered and thus difficult to explore. In this paper, we propose a novel geometry-based edge-clustering framework that can group edges into bundles to reduce the overall edge crossings. Our method uses a control mesh to guide the edge-clustering process; edge bundles can be formed by forcing all edges to pass through some control points on the mesh. The control mesh can be generated at different levels of detail either manually or automatically based on underlying graph patterns. Users can further interact with the edge-clustering results through several advanced visualization techniques such as color and opacity enhancement. Compared with other edge-clustering methods, our approach is intuitive, flexible, and efficient. The experiments on some large graphs demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
infovis-2008-19	On the Visualization of Social and other Scale-Free Networks. This paper proposes novel methods for visualizing specifically the large power-law graphs that arise in sociology and the sciences. In such cases a large portion of edges can be shown to be less important and removed while preserving component connectedness and other features (e.g. cliques) to more clearly reveal the networkpsilas underlying connection pathways. This simplification approach deterministically filters (instead of clustering) the graph to retain important node and edge semantics, and works both automatically and interactively. The improved graph filtering and layout is combined with a novel computer graphics anisotropic shading of the dense crisscrossing array of edges to yield a full social network and scale-free graph visualization system. Both quantitative analysis and visual results demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach.
infovis-2008-20	Exploration of Networks Using Overview+Detail with Constraint-based Cooperative Layout. A standard approach to large network visualization is to provide an overview of the network and a detailed view of a small component of the graph centred around a focal node. The user explores the network by changing the focal node in the detailed view or by changing the level of detail of a node or cluster. For scalability, fast force-based layout algorithms are used for the overview and the detailed view. However, using the same layout algorithm in both views is problematic since layout for the detailed view has different requirements to that in the overview. Here we present a model in which constrained graph layout algorithms are used for layout in the detailed view. This means the detailed view has high-quality layout including sophisticated edge routing and is customisable by the user who can add placement constraints on the layout. Scalability is still ensured since the slower layout techniques are only applied to the small subgraph shown in the detailed view. The main technical innovations are techniques to ensure that the overview and detailed view remain synchronized, and modifying constrained graph layout algorithms to support smooth, stable layout. The key innovation supporting stability are new dynamic graph layout algorithms that preserve the topology or structure of the network when the user changes the focus node or the level of detail by in situ semantic zooming. We have built a prototype tool and demonstrate its use in two application domains, UML class diagrams and biological networks.
infovis-2008-21	Rapid Graph Layout Using Space Filling Curves. Network data frequently arises in a wide variety of fields, and node-link diagrams are a very natural and intuitive representation of such data. In order for a node-link diagram to be effective, the nodes must be arranged well on the screen. While many graph layout algorithms exist for this purpose, they often have limitations such as high computational complexity or node colocation. This paper proposes a new approach to graph layout through the use of space filling curves which is very fast and guarantees that there will be no nodes that are colocated. The resulting layout is also aesthetic and satisfies several criteria for graph layout effectiveness.
infovis-2008-22	Evaluating the Use of Data Transformation for Information Visualization. Data transformation, the process of preparing raw data for effective visualization, is one of the key challenges in information visualization. Although researchers have developed many data transformation techniques, there is little empirical study of the general impact of data transformation on visualization. Without such study, it is difficult to systematically decide when and which data transformation techniques are needed. We thus have designed and conducted a two-part empirical study that examines how the use of common data transformation techniques impacts visualization quality, which in turn affects user task performance. Our first experiment studies the impact of data transformation on user performance in single-step, typical visual analytic tasks. The second experiment assesses the impact of data transformation in multi-step analytic tasks. Our results quantify the benefits of data transformation in both experiments. More importantly, our analyses reveal that (1) the benefits of data transformation vary significantly by task and by visualization, and (2) the use of data transformation depends on a user's interaction context. Based on our findings, we present a set of design recommendations that help guide the development and use of data transformation techniques.
infovis-2008-23	Improving the Readability of Clustered Social Networks using Node Duplication. Exploring communities is an important task in social network analysis. Such communities are currently identified using clustering methods to group actors. This approach often leads to actors belonging to one and only one cluster, whereas in real life a person can belong to several communities. As a solution we propose duplicating actors in social networks and discuss potential impact of such a move. Several visual duplication designs are discussed and a controlled experiment comparing network visualization with and without duplication is performed, using 6 tasks that are important for graph readability and visual interpretation of social networks. We show that in our experiment, duplications significantly improve community-related tasks but sometimes interfere with other graph readability tasks. Finally, we propose a set of guidelines for deciding when to duplicate actors and choosing candidates for duplication, and alternative ways to render them in social network representations.
infovis-2008-24	Effectiveness of Animation in Trend Visualization. Animation has been used to show trends in multi-dimensional data. This technique has recently gained new prominence for presentations, most notably with Gapminder Trendalyzer. In Trendalyzer, animation together with interesting data and an engaging presenter helps the audience understand the results of an analysis of the data. It is less clear whether trend animation is effective for analysis. This paper proposes two alternative trend visualizations that use static depictions of trends: one which shows traces of all trends overlaid simultaneously in one display and a second that uses a small multiples display to show the trend traces side-by-side. The paper evaluates the three visualizations for both analysis and presentation. Results indicate that trend animation can be challenging to use even for presentations; while it is the fastest technique for presentation and participants find it enjoyable and exciting, it does lead to many participant errors. Animation is the least effective form for analysis; both static depictions of trends are significantly faster than animation, and the small multiples display is more accurate.
infovis-2008-25	Perceptual Organization in User-Generated Graph Layouts. Many graph layout algorithms optimize visual characteristics to achieve useful representations. Implicitly, their goal is to create visual representations that are more intuitive to human observers. In this paper, we asked users to explicitly manipulate nodes in a network diagram to create layouts that they felt best captured the relationships in the data. This allowed us to measure organizational behavior directly, allowing us to evaluate the perceptual importance of particular visual features, such as edge crossings and edge-lengths uniformity. We also manipulated the interior structure of the node relationships by designing data sets that contained clusters, that is, sets of nodes that are strongly interconnected. By varying the degree to which these clusters were ldquomaskedrdquo by extraneous edges we were able to measure observerspsila sensitivity to the existence of clusters and how they revealed them in the network diagram. Based on these measurements we found that observers are able to recover cluster structure, that the distance between clusters is inversely related to the strength of the clustering, and that users exhibit the tendency to use edges to visually delineate perceptual groups. These results demonstrate the role of perceptual organization in representing graph data and provide concrete recommendations for graph layout algorithms.
infovis-2008-26	Interactive Visual Analysis of Set-Typed Data. While it is quite typical to deal with attributes of different data types in the visualization of heterogeneous and multivariate datasets, most existing techniques still focus on the most usual data types such as numerical attributes or strings. In this paper we present a new approach to the interactive visual exploration and analysis of data that contains attributes which are of set type. A set-typed attribute of a data item - like one cell in a table - has a list of nGt=0 elements as its value. We present the setpsilaopsilagram as a new visualization approach to represent data of set type and to enable interactive visual exploration and analysis. We also demonstrate how this approach is capable to help in dealing with datasets that have a larger number of dimensions (more than a dozen or more), especially also in the context of categorical data. To illustrate the effectiveness of our approach, we present the interactive visual analysis of a CRM dataset with data from a questionnaire on the education and shopping habits of about 90000 people.
infovis-2008-27	Spatially Ordered Treemaps. Existing treemap layout algorithms suffer to some extent from poor or inconsistent mappings between data order and visual ordering in their representation, reducing their cognitive plausibility. While attempts have been made to quantify this mismatch, and algorithms proposed to minimize inconsistency, solutions provided tend to concentrate on one-dimensional ordering. We propose extensions to the existing squarified layout algorithm that exploit the two-dimensional arrangement of treemap nodes more effectively. Our proposed spatial squarified layout algorithm provides a more consistent arrangement of nodes while maintaining low aspect ratios. It is suitable for the arrangement of data with a geographic component and can be used to create tessellated cartograms for geovisualization. Locational consistency is measured and visualized and a number of layout algorithms are compared. CIELab color space and displacement vector overlays are used to assess and emphasize the spatial layout of treemap nodes. A case study involving locations of tagged photographs in the Flickr database is described.
infovis-2008-28	Visualizing Incomplete and Partially Ranked Data. Ranking data, which result from m raters ranking n items, are difficult to visualize due to their discrete algebraic structure, and the computational difficulties associated with them when n is large. This problem becomes worse when raters provide tied rankings or not all items are ranked. We develop an approach for the visualization of ranking data for large n which is intuitive, easy to use, and computationally efficient. The approach overcomes the structural and computational difficulties by utilizing a natural measure of dissimilarity for raters, and projecting the raters into a low dimensional vector space where they are viewed. The visualization techniques are demonstrated using voting data, jokes, and movie preferences.
infovis-2009-01	ABySS-Explorer: Visualizing Genome Sequence Assemblies. One bottleneck in large-scale genome sequencing projects is reconstructing the full genome sequence from the short subsequences produced by current technologies. The final stages of the genome assembly process inevitably require manual inspection of data inconsistencies and could be greatly aided by visualization. This paper presents our design decisions in translating key data features identified through discussions with analysts into a concise visual encoding. Current visualization tools in this domain focus on local sequence errors making high-level inspection of the assembly difficult if not impossible. We present a novel interactive graph display, ABySS-Explorer, that emphasizes the global assembly structure while also integrating salient data features such as sequence length. Our tool replaces manual and in some cases pen-and-paper based analysis tasks, and we discuss how user feedback was incorporated into iterative design refinements. Finally, we touch on applications of this representation not initially considered in our design phase, suggesting the generality of this encoding for DNA sequence data.
infovis-2009-02	Constructing Overview + Detail Dendrogram-Matrix Views. A dendrogram that visualizes a clustering hierarchy is often integrated with a re-orderable matrix for pattern identification. The method is widely used in many research fields including biology, geography, statistics, and data mining. However, most dendrograms do not scale up well, particularly with respect to problems of graphical and cognitive information overload. This research proposes a strategy that links an overview dendrogram and a detail-view dendrogram, each integrated with a re-orderable matrix. The overview displays only a user-controlled, limited number of nodes that represent the ldquoskeletonrdquo of a hierarchy. The detail view displays the sub-tree represented by a selected meta-node in the overview. The research presented here focuses on constructing a concise overview dendrogram and its coordination with a detail view. The proposed method has the following benefits: dramatic alleviation of information overload, enhanced scalability and data abstraction quality on the dendrogram, and the support of data exploration at arbitrary levels of detail. The contribution of the paper includes a new metric to measure the ldquoimportancerdquo of nodes in a dendrogram; the method to construct the concise overview dendrogram from the dynamically-identified, important nodes; and measure for evaluating the data abstraction quality for dendrograms. We evaluate and compare the proposed method to some related existing methods, and demonstrating how the proposed method can help users find interesting patterns through a case study on county-level U.S. cervical cancer mortality and demographic data.
infovis-2009-03	MizBee: A Multiscale Synteny Browser. In the field of comparative genomics, scientists seek to answer questions about evolution and genomic function by comparing the genomes of species to find regions of shared sequences. Conserve dsyntenic blocks are an important biological data abstraction for indicating regions of shared sequences. The goal of this work is to show multiple types of relationships at multiple scales in a way that is visually comprehensible in accordance with known perceptual principles. We present a task analysis for this domain where the fundamental questions asked by biologists can be understood by a characterization of relationships into the four types of proximity/location, size, orientation, and similarity/strength, and the four scales of genome, chromosome, block, and genomic feature. We also propose a new taxonomy of the design space for visually encoding conservation data. We present MizBee, a multiscale synteny browser with the unique property of providing interactive side-by-side views of the data across the range of scales supporting exploration of all of these relationship types. We conclude with case studies from two biologists who used MizBee to augment their previous automatic analysis work flow, providing anecdotal evidence about the efficacy of the system for the visualization of syntenic data, the analysis of conservation relationships, and the communication of scientific insights.
infovis-2009-04	GeneShelf: A Web-based Visual Interface for Large Gene Expression Time-Series Data Repositories. A widespread use of high-throughput gene expression analysis techniques enabled the biomedical research community to share a huge body of gene expression datasets in many public databases on the web. However, current gene expression data repositories provide static representations of the data and support limited interactions. This hinders biologists from effectively exploring shared gene expression datasets. Responding to the growing need for better interfaces to improve the utility of the public datasets, we have designed and developed a new web-based visual interface entitled GeneShelf (http://bioinformatics.cnmcresearch.org/GeneShelf). It builds upon a zoomable grid display to represent two categorical dimensions. It also incorporates an augmented timeline with expandable time points that better shows multiple data values for the focused time point by embedding bar charts. We applied GeneShelf to one of the largest microarray datasets generated to study the progression and recovery process of injuries at the spinal cord of mice and rats. We present a case study and a preliminary qualitative user study with biologists to show the utility and usability of GeneShelf.
infovis-2009-05	Spatiotemporal Analysis of Sensor Logs using Growth Ring Maps. Spatiotemporal analysis of sensor logs is a challenging research field due to three facts: a) traditional two-dimensional maps do not support multiple events to occur at the same spatial location, b) three-dimensional solutions introduce ambiguity and are hard to navigate, and c) map distortions to solve the overlap problem are unfamiliar to most users. This paper introduces a novel approach to represent spatial data changing over time by plotting a number of non-overlapping pixels, close to the sensor positions in a map. Thereby, we encode the amount of time that a subject spent at a particular sensor to the number of plotted pixels. Color is used in a twofold manner; while distinct colors distinguish between sensor nodes in different regions, the colors' intensity is used as an indicator to the temporal property of the subjects' activity. The resulting visualization technique, called growth ring maps, enables users to find similarities and extract patterns of interest in spatiotemporal data by using humans' perceptual abilities. We demonstrate the newly introduced technique on a dataset that shows the behavior of healthy and Alzheimer transgenic, male and female mice. We motivate the new technique by showing that the temporal analysis based on hierarchical clustering and the spatial analysis based on transition matrices only reveal limited results. Results and findings are cross-validated using multidimensional scaling. While the focus of this paper is to apply our visualization for monitoring animal behavior, the technique is also applicable for analyzing data, such as packet tracing, geographic monitoring of sales development, or mobile phone capacity planning.
infovis-2009-06	A Nested Model for Visualization Design and Validation. We present a nested model for the visualization design and validation with four layers: characterize the task and data in the vocabulary of the problem domain, abstract into operations and data types, design visual encoding and interaction techniques, and create algorithms to execute techniques efficiently. The output from a level above is input to the level below, bringing attention to the design challenge that an upstream error inevitably cascades to all downstream levels. This model provides prescriptive guidance for determining appropriate evaluation approaches by identifying threats to validity unique to each level. We also provide three recommendations motivated by this model: authors should distinguish between these levels when claiming contributions at more than one of them, authors should explicitly state upstream assumptions at levels above the focus of a paper, and visualization venues should accept more papers on domain characterization.
infovis-2009-07	Conjunctive Visual Forms. Visual exploration of multidimensional data is a process of isolating and extracting relationships within and between dimensions. Coordinated multiple view approaches are particularly effective for visual exploration because they support precise expression of heterogeneous multidimensional queries using simple interactions. Recent visual analytics research has made significant progress in identifying and understanding patterns of composed views and coordinations that support fast, flexible, and open-ended data exploration. What is missing is formalization of the space of expressible queries in terms of visual representation and interaction. This paper introduces the conjunctive visual form model in which visual exploration consists of interactively-driven sequences of transitions between visual states that correspond to conjunctive normal forms in boolean logic. The model predicts several new and useful ways to extend the space of rapidly expressible queries through addition of simple interactive capabilities to existing compositional patterns. Two recent related visual tools offer a subset of these capabilities, providing a basis for conjecturing about such extensions.
infovis-2009-08	Interaction Techniques for Selecting and Manipulating Subgraphs in Network Visualizations. We present a novel and extensible set of interaction techniques for manipulating visualizations of networks by selecting subgraphs and then applying various commands to modify their layout or graphical properties. Our techniques integrate traditional rectangle and lasso selection, and also support selecting a node's neighbourhood by dragging out its radius (in edges) using a novel kind of radial menu. Commands for translation, rotation, scaling, or modifying graphical properties (such as opacity) and layout patterns can be performed by using a hotbox (a transiently popped-up, semi-transparent set of widgets) that has been extended in novel ways to integrate specification of commands with 1D or 2D arguments. Our techniques require only one mouse button and one keyboard key, and are designed for fast, gestural, in-place interaction. We present the design and integration of these interaction techniques, and illustrate their use in interactive graph visualization. Our techniques are implemented in NAViGaTOR, a software package for visualizing and analyzing biological networks. An initial usability study is also reported.
infovis-2009-09	ActiviTree: Interactive Visual Exploration of Sequences in Event-Based Data Using Graph Similarity. The identification of significant sequences in large and complex event-based temporal data is a challenging problem with applications in many areas of today's information intensive society. Pure visual representations can be used for the analysis, but are constrained to small data sets. Algorithmic search mechanisms used for larger data sets become expensive as the data size increases and typically focus on frequency of occurrence to reduce the computational complexity, often overlooking important infrequent sequences and outliers. In this paper we introduce an interactive visual data mining approach based on an adaptation of techniques developed for Web searching, combined with an intuitive visual interface, to facilitate user-centred exploration of the data and identification of sequences significant to that user. The search algorithm used in the exploration executes in negligible time, even for large data, and so no pre-processing of the selected data is required, making this a completely interactive experience for the user. Our particular application area is social science diary data but the technique is applicable across many other disciplines.
infovis-2009-10	"Search, Show Context, Expand on Demand": Supporting Large Graph Exploration with Degree-of-Interest. A common goal in graph visualization research is the design of novel techniques for displaying an overview of an entire graph. However, there are many situations where such an overview is not relevant or practical for users, as analyzing the global structure may not be related to the main task of the users that have semi-specific information needs. Furthermore, users accessing large graph databases through an online connection or users running on less powerful (mobile) hardware simply do not have the resources needed to compute these overviews. In this paper, we advocate an interaction model that allows users to remotely browse the immediate context graph around a specific node of interest. We show how Furnas' original degree of interest function can be adapted from trees to graphs and how we can use this metric to extract useful contextual subgraphs, control the complexity of the generated visualization and direct users to interesting datapoints in the context. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach with an exploration of a dense online database containing over 3 million legal citations.
infovis-2009-11	A Comparison of User-Generated and Automatic Graph Layouts. The research presented in this paper compares user-generated and automatic graph layouts. Following the methods suggested by van Ham et al. (2008), a group of users generated graph layouts using both multi-touch interaction on a tabletop display and mouse interaction on a desktop computer. Users were asked to optimize their layout for aesthetics and analytical tasks with a social network. We discuss characteristics of the user-generated layouts and interaction methods employed by users in this process. We then report on a web-based study to compare these layouts with the output of popular automatic layout algorithms. Our results demonstrate that the best of the user-generated layouts performed as well as or better than the physics-based layout. Orthogonal and circular automatic layouts were found to be considerably less effective than either the physics-based layout or the best of the user-generated layouts. We highlight several attributes of the various layouts that led to high accuracy and improved task completion time, as well as aspects in which traditional automatic layout methods were unsuccessful for our tasks.
infovis-2009-12	Smooth Graphs for Visual Exploration of Higher-Order State Transitions. In this paper, we present a new visual way of exploring state sequences in large observational time-series. A key advantage of our method is that it can directly visualize higher-order state transitions. A standard first order state transition is a sequence of two states that are linked by a transition. A higher-order state transition is a sequence of three or more states where the sequence of participating states are linked together by consecutive first order state transitions. Our method extends the current state-graph exploration methods by employing a two dimensional graph, in which higher-order state transitions are visualized as curved lines. All transitions are bundled into thick splines, so that the thickness of an edge represents the frequency of instances. The bundling between two states takes into account the state transitions before and after the transition. This is done in such a way that it forms a continuous representation in which any subsequence of the timeseries is represented by a continuous smooth line. The edge bundles in these graphs can be explored interactively through our incremental selection algorithm. We demonstrate our method with an application in exploring labeled time-series data from a biological survey, where a clustering has assigned a single label to the data at each time-point. In these sequences, a large number of cyclic patterns occur, which in turn are linked to specific activities. We demonstrate how our method helps to find these cycles, and how the interactive selection process helps to find and investigate activities.
infovis-2009-13	Configuring Hierarchical Layouts to Address Research Questions. We explore the effects of selecting alternative layouts in hierarchical displays that show multiple aspects of large multivariate datasets, including spatial and temporal characteristics. Hierarchical displays of this type condition a dataset by multiple discrete variable values, creating nested graphical summaries of the resulting subsets in which size, shape and colour can be used to show subset properties. These 'small multiples' are ordered by the conditioning variable values and are laid out hierarchically using dimensional stacking. Crucially, we consider the use of different layouts at different hierarchical levels, so that the coordinates of the plane can be used more effectively to draw attention to trends and anomalies in the data. We argue that these layouts should be informed by the type of conditioning variable and by the research question being explored. We focus on space-filling rectangular layouts that provide data-dense and rich overviews of data to address research questions posed in our exploratory analysis of spatial and temporal aspects of property sales in London. We develop a notation ('HiVE') that describes visualisation and layout states and provides reconfiguration operators, demonstrate its use for reconfiguring layouts to pursue research questions and provide guidelines for this process. We demonstrate how layouts can be related through animated transitions to reduce the cognitive load associated with their reconfiguration whilst supporting the exploratory process.
infovis-2009-14	Visualizing Social Photos on a Hasse Diagram for Eliciting Relations and Indexing New Photos. Social photos, which are taken during family events or parties, represent individuals or groups of people. We show in this paper how a Hasse diagram is an efficient visualization strategy for eliciting different groups and navigating through them. However, we do not limit this strategy to these traditional uses. Instead we show how it can also be used for assisting in indexing new photos. Indexing consists of identifying the event and people in photos. It is an integral phase that takes place before searching and sharing. In our method we use existing indexed photos to index new photos. This is performed through a manual drag and drop procedure followed by a content fusion process that we call 'propagation'. At the core of this process is the necessity to organize and visualize the photos that will be used for indexing in a manner that is easily recognizable and accessible by the user. In this respect we make use of an object Galois sub-hierarchy and display it using a Hasse diagram. The need for an incremental display that maintains the user's mental map also leads us to propose a novel way of building the Hasse diagram. To validate the approach, we present some tests conducted with a sample of users that confirm the interest of this organization, visualization and indexation approach. Finally, we conclude by considering scalability, the possibility to extract social networks and automatically create personalised albums.
infovis-2009-15	Interactive Dimensionality Reduction Through User-defined Combinations of Quality Metrics. Multivariate data sets including hundreds of variables are increasingly common in many application areas. Most multivariate visualization techniques are unable to display such data effectively, and a common approach is to employ dimensionality reduction prior to visualization. Most existing dimensionality reduction systems focus on preserving one or a few significant structures in data. For many analysis tasks, however, several types of structures can be of high significance and the importance of a certain structure compared to the importance of another is often task-dependent. This paper introduces a system for dimensionality reduction by combining user-defined quality metrics using weight functions to preserve as many important structures as possible. The system aims at effective visualization and exploration of structures within large multivariate data sets and provides enhancement of diverse structures by supplying a range of automatic variable orderings. Furthermore it enables a quality-guided reduction of variables through an interactive display facilitating investigation of trade-offs between loss of structure and the number of variables to keep. The generality and interactivity of the system is demonstrated through a case scenario.
infovis-2009-16	Scattering Points in Parallel Coordinates. In this paper, we present a novel parallel coordinates design integrated with points (scattering points in parallel coordinates, SPPC), by taking advantage of both parallel coordinates and scatterplots. Different from most multiple views visualization frameworks involving parallel coordinates where each visualization type occupies an individual window, we convert two selected neighboring coordinate axes into a scatterplot directly. Multidimensional scaling is adopted to allow converting multiple axes into a single subplot. The transition between two visual types is designed in a seamless way. In our work, a series of interaction tools has been developed. Uniform brushing functionality is implemented to allow the user to perform data selection on both points and parallel coordinate polylines without explicitly switching tools. A GPU accelerated dimensional incremental multidimensional scaling (DIMDS) has been developed to significantly improve the system performance. Our case study shows that our scheme is more efficient than traditional multi-view methods in performing visual analysis tasks.
infovis-2009-17	Bubble Sets: Revealing Set Relations with Isocontours over Existing Visualizations. While many data sets contain multiple relationships, depicting more than one data relationship within a single visualization is challenging. We introduce Bubble Sets as a visualization technique for data that has both a primary data relation with a semantically significant spatial organization and a significant set membership relation in which members of the same set are not necessarily adjacent in the primary layout. In order to maintain the spatial rights of the primary data relation, we avoid layout adjustment techniques that improve set cluster continuity and density. Instead, we use a continuous, possibly concave, isocontour to delineate set membership, without disrupting the primary layout. Optimizations minimize cluster overlap and provide for calculation of the isocontours at interactive speeds. Case studies show how this technique can be used to indicate multiple sets on a variety of common visualizations.
infovis-2009-18	FromDaDy: Spreading Aircraft Trajectories Across Views to Support Iterative Queries. When displaying thousands of aircraft trajectories on a screen, the visualization is spoiled by a tangle of trails. The visual analysis is therefore difficult, especially if a specific class of trajectories in an erroneous dataset has to be studied. We designed FromDaDy, a trajectory visualization tool that tackles the difficulties of exploring the visualization of multiple trails. This multidimensional data exploration is based on scatterplots, brushing, pick and drop, juxtaposed views and rapid visual design. Users can organize the workspace composed of multiple juxtaposed views. They can define the visual configuration of the views by connecting data dimensions from the dataset to Bertin's visual variables. They can then brush trajectories, and with a pick and drop operation they can spread the brushed information across views. They can then repeat these interactions, until they extract a set of relevant data, thus formulating complex queries. Through two real-world scenarios, we show how FromDaDy supports iterative queries and the extraction of trajectories in a dataset that contains up to 5 million data.
infovis-2009-19	SellTrend: Inter-Attribute Visual Analysis of Temporal Transaction Data. We present a case study of our experience designing SellTrend, a visualization system for analyzing airline travel purchase requests. The relevant transaction data can be characterized as multi-variate temporal and categorical event sequences, and the chief problem addressed is how to help company analysts identify complex combinations of transaction attributes that contribute to failed purchase requests. SellTrend combines a diverse set of techniques ranging from time series visualization to faceted browsing and historical trend analysis in order to help analysts make sense of the data. We believe that the combination of views and interaction capabilities in SellTrend provides an innovative approach to this problem and to other similar types of multivariate, temporally driven transaction data analysis. Initial feedback from company analysts confirms the utility and benefits of the system.
infovis-2009-20	Comparing Dot and Landscape Spatializations for Visual Memory Differences. Spatialization displays use a geographic metaphor to arrange non-spatial data. For example, spatializations are commonly applied to document collections so that document themes appear as geographic features such as hills. Many common spatialization interfaces use a 3-D landscape metaphor to present data. However, it is not clear whether 3-D spatializations afford improved speed and accuracy for user tasks compared to similar 2-D spatializations. We describe a user study comparing users' ability to remember dot displays, 2-D landscapes, and 3-D landscapes for two different data densities (500 vs. 1000 points). Participants' visual memory was statistically more accurate when viewing dot displays and 3-D landscapes compared to 2-D landscapes. Furthermore, accuracy remembering a spatialization was significantly better overall for denser spatializations. Theseresults are of benefit to visualization designers who are contemplating the best ways to present data using spatialization techniques.
infovis-2009-21	Flow Mapping and Multivariate Visualization of Large Spatial Interaction Data. Spatial interactions (or flows), such as population migration and disease spread, naturally form a weighted location-to-location network (graph). Such geographically embedded networks (graphs) are usually very large. For example, the county-to-county migration data in the U.S. has thousands of counties and about a million migration paths. Moreover, many variables are associated with each flow, such as the number of migrants for different age groups, income levels, and occupations. It is a challenging task to visualize such data and discover network structures, multivariate relations, and their geographic patterns simultaneously. This paper addresses these challenges by developing an integrated interactive visualization framework that consists three coupled components: (1) a spatially constrained graph partitioning method that can construct a hierarchy of geographical regions (communities), where there are more flows or connections within regions than across regions; (2) a multivariate clustering and visualization method to detect and present multivariate patterns in the aggregated region-to-region flows; and (3) a highly interactive flow mapping component to map both flow and multivariate patterns in the geographic space, at different hierarchical levels. The proposed approach can process relatively large data sets and effectively discover and visualize major flow structures and multivariate relations at the same time. User interactions are supported to facilitate the understanding of both an overview and detailed patterns.
infovis-2009-22	Temporal Summaries: Supporting Temporal Categorical Searching, Aggregation and Comparison. When analyzing thousands of event histories, analysts often want to see the events as an aggregate to detect insights and generate new hypotheses about the data. An analysis tool must emphasize both the prevalence and the temporal ordering of these events. Additionally, the analysis tool must also support flexible comparisons to allow analysts to gather visual evidence. In a previous work, we introduced align, rank, and filter (ARF) to accentuate temporal ordering. In this paper, we present temporal summaries, an interactive visualization technique that highlights the prevalence of event occurrences. Temporal summaries dynamically aggregate events in multiple granularities (year, month, week, day, hour, etc.) for the purpose of spotting trends over time and comparing several groups of records. They provide affordances for analysts to perform temporal range filters. We demonstrate the applicability of this approach in two extensive case studies with analysts who applied temporal summaries to search, filter, and look for patterns in electronic health records and academic records.
infovis-2009-23	ResultMaps: Visualization for Search Interfaces. Hierarchical representations are common in digital repositories, yet are not always fully leveraged in their online search interfaces. This work describes ResultMaps, which use hierarchical treemap representations with query string-driven digital library search engines. We describe two lab experiments, which find that ResultsMap users yield significantly better results over a control condition on some subjective measures, and we find evidence that ResultMaps have ancillary benefits via increased understanding of some aspects of repository content. The ResultMap system and experiments contribute an understanding of the benefits-direct and indirect-of the ResultMap approach to repository search visualization.
infovis-2009-24	Lark: Coordinating Co-located Collaboration with Information Visualization. Large multi-touch displays are expanding the possibilities of multiple-coordinated views by allowing multiple people to interact with data in concert or independently. We present Lark, a system that facilitates the coordination of interactions with information visualizations on shared digital workspaces. We focus on supporting this coordination according to four main criteria: scoped interaction, temporal flexibility, spatial flexibility, and changing collaboration styles. These are achieved by integrating a representation of the information visualization pipeline into the shared workspace, thus explicitly indicating coordination points on data, representation, presentation, and view levels. This integrated meta-visualization supports both the awareness of how views are linked and the freedom to work in concert or independently. Lark incorporates these four main criteria into a coherent visualization collaboration interaction environment by providing direct visual and algorithmic support for the coordination of data analysis actions over shared large displays.
infovis-2009-25	The Benefits of Synchronous Collaborative Information Visualization: Evidence from an Experimental Evaluation. A great corpus of studies reports empirical evidence of how information visualization supports comprehension and analysis of data. The benefits of visualization for synchronous group knowledge work, however, have not been addressed extensively. Anecdotal evidence and use cases illustrate the benefits of synchronous collaborative information visualization, but very few empirical studies have rigorously examined the impact of visualization on group knowledge work. We have consequently designed and conducted an experiment in which we have analyzed the impact of visualization on knowledge sharing in situated work groups. Our experimental study consists of evaluating the performance of 131 subjects (all experienced managers) in groups of 5 (for a total of 26 groups), working together on a real-life knowledge sharing task. We compare (1) the control condition (no visualization provided), with two visualization supports: (2) optimal and (3) suboptimal visualization (based on a previous survey). The facilitator of each group was asked to populate the provided interactive visual template with insights from the group, and to organize the contributions according to the group consensus. We have evaluated the results through both objective and subjective measures. Our statistical analysis clearly shows that interactive visualization has a statistically significant, objective and positive impact on the outcomes of knowledge sharing, but that the subjects seem not to be aware of this. In particular, groups supported by visualization achieved higher productivity, higher quality of outcome and greater knowledge gains. No statistically significant results could be found between an optimal and a suboptimal visualization though (as classified by the pre-experiment survey). Subjects also did not seem to be aware of the benefits that the visualizations provided as no difference between the visualization and the control conditions was found for the self-reported measures of satisfaction a- nd participation. An implication of our study for information visualization applications is to extend them by using real-time group annotation functionalities that aid in the group sense making process of the represented data.
infovis-2009-26	Harnessing the Web Information Ecosystem with Wiki-based Visualization Dashboards. We describe the design and deployment of Dashiki, a public Website where users may collaboratively build visualization dashboards through a combination of a wiki-like syntax and interactive editors. Our goals are to extend existing research on social data analysis into presentation and organization of data from multiple sources, explore new metaphors for these activities, and participate more fully in the Web's information ecology by providing tighter integration with real-time data. To support these goals, our design includes novel and low-barrier mechanisms for editing and layout of dashboard pages and visualizations, connection to data sources, and coordinating interaction between visualizations. In addition to describing these technologies, we provide a preliminary report on the public launch of a prototype based on this design, including a description of the activities of our users derived from observation and interviews.
infovis-2009-27	SpicyNodes: Radial Layout Authoring for the General Public. Trees and graphs are relevant to many online tasks such as visualizing social networks, product catalogs, educational portals, digital libraries, the semantic web, concept maps and personalized information management. SpicyNodes is an information-visualization technology that builds upon existing research on radial tree layouts and graph structures. Users can browse a tree, clicking from node to node, as well as successively viewing a node, immediately related nodes and the path back to the ldquohomerdquo nodes. SpicyNodes' layout algorithms maintain balanced layouts using a hybrid mixture of a geometric layout (a succession of spanning radial trees) and force-directed layouts to minimize overlapping nodes, plus several other improvements over prior art. It provides XML-based API and GUI authoring tools. The goal of the SpicyNodes project is to implement familiar principles of radial maps and focus+context with an attractive and inviting look and feel in an open system that is accessible to virtually any Internet user.
infovis-2009-28	code_swarm: A Design Study in Organic Software Visualization. In May of 2008, we published online a series of software visualization videos using a method called code_swarm. Shortly thereafter, we made the code open source and its popularity took off. This paper is a study of our code swarm application, comprising its design, results and public response. We share our design methodology, including why we chose the organic information visualization technique, how we designed for both developers and a casual audience, and what lessons we learned from our experiment. We validate the results produced by code_swarm through a qualitative analysis and by gathering online user comments. Furthermore, we successfully released the code as open source, and the software community used it to visualize their own projects and shared their results as well. In the end, we believe code_swarm has positive implications for the future of organic information design and open source information visualization practice.
infovis-2009-29	Towards Utilizing GPUs in Information Visualization: A Model and Implementation of Image-Space Operations. Modern programmable GPUs represent a vast potential in terms of performance and visual flexibility for information visualization research, but surprisingly few applications even begin to utilize this potential. In this paper, we conjecture that this may be due to the mismatch between the high-level abstract data types commonly visualized in our field, and the low-level floating-point model supported by current GPU shader languages. To help remedy this situation, we present a refinement of the traditional information visualization pipeline that is amenable to implementation using GPU shaders. The refinement consists of a final image-space step in the pipeline where the multivariate data of the visualization is sampled in the resolution of the current view. To concretize the theoretical aspects of this work, we also present a visual programming environment for constructing visualization shaders using a simple drag-and-drop interface. Finally, we give some examples of the use of shaders for well-known visualization techniques.
infovis-2009-30	A Multi-Threading Architecture to Support Interactive Visual Exploration. During continuous user interaction, it is hard to provide rich visual feedback at interactive rates for datasets containing millions of entries. The contribution of this paper is a generic architecture that ensures responsiveness of the application even when dealing with large data and that is applicable to most types of information visualizations. Our architecture builds on the separation of the main application thread and the visualization thread, which can be cancelled early due to user interaction. In combination with a layer mechanism, our architecture facilitates generating previews incrementally to provide rich visual feedback quickly. To help avoiding common pitfalls of multi-threading, we discuss synchronization and communication in detail. We explicitly denote design choices to control trade-offs. A quantitative evaluation based on the system VI S P L ORE shows fast visual feedback during continuous interaction even for millions of entries. We describe instantiations of our architecture in additional tools.
infovis-2009-31	Protovis: A Graphical Toolkit for Visualization. Despite myriad tools for visualizing data, there remains a gap between the notational efficiency of high-level visualization systems and the expressiveness and accessibility of low-level graphical systems. Powerful visualization systems may be inflexible or impose abstractions foreign to visual thinking, while graphical systems such as rendering APIs and vector-based drawing programs are tedious for complex work. We argue that an easy-to-use graphical system tailored for visualization is needed. In response, we contribute Protovis, an extensible toolkit for constructing visualizations by composing simple graphical primitives. In Protovis, designers specify visualizations as a hierarchy of marks with visual properties defined as functions of data. This representation achieves a level of expressiveness comparable to low-level graphics systems, while improving efficiency - the effort required to specify a visualization - and accessibility - the effort required to learn and modify the representation. We substantiate this claim through a diverse collection of examples and comparative analysis with popular visualization tools.
infovis-2009-32	Visual Analysis of Inter-Process Communication for Large-Scale Parallel Computing. In serial computation, program profiling is often helpful for optimization of key sections of code. When moving to parallel computation, not only does the code execution need to be considered but also communication between the different processes which can induce delays that are detrimental to performance. As the number of processes increases, so does the impact of the communication delays on performance. For large-scale parallel applications, it is critical to understand how the communication impacts performance in order to make the code more efficient. There are several tools available for visualizing program execution and communications on parallel systems. These tools generally provide either views which statistically summarize the entire program execution or process-centric views. However, process-centric visualizations do not scale well as the number of processes gets very large. In particular, the most common representation of parallel processes is a Gantt chart with a row for each process. As the number of processes increases, these charts can become difficult to work with and can even exceed screen resolution. We propose a new visualization approach that affords more scalability and then demonstrate it on systems running with up to 16,384 processes.
infovis-2009-33	Participatory Visualization with Wordle. We discuss the design and usage of ldquoWordle,rdquo a Web-based tool for visualizing text. Wordle creates tag-cloud-like displays that give careful attention to typography, color, and composition. We describe the algorithms used to balance various aesthetic criteria and create the distinctive Wordle layouts. We then present the results of a study of Wordle usage, based both on spontaneous behaviour observed in the wild, and on a large-scale survey of Wordle users. The results suggest that Wordles have become a kind of medium of expression, and that a ldquoparticipatory culturerdquo has arisen around them.
infovis-2009-34	Document Cards: A Top Trumps Visualization for Documents. Finding suitable, less space consuming views for a document's main content is crucial to provide convenient access to large document collections on display devices of different size. We present a novel compact visualization which represents the document's key semantic as a mixture of images and important key terms, similar to cards in a top trumps game. The key terms are extracted using an advanced text mining approach based on a fully automatic document structure extraction. The images and their captions are extracted using a graphical heuristic and the captions are used for a semi-semantic image weighting. Furthermore, we use the image color histogram for classification and show at least one representative from each non-empty image class. The approach is demonstrated for the IEEE InfoVis publications of a complete year. The method can easily be applied to other publication collections and sets of documents which contain images.
infovis-2009-35	Visualizing the Intellectual Structure with Paper-Reference Matrices. Visualizing the intellectual structure of scientific domains using co-cited units such as references or authors has become a routine for domain analysis. In previous studies, paper-reference matrices are usually transformed into reference-reference matrices to obtain co-citation relationships, which are then visualized in different representations, typically as node-link networks, to represent the intellectual structures of scientific domains. Such network visualizations sometimes contain tightly knit components, which make visual analysis of the intellectual structure a challenging task. In this study, we propose a new approach to reveal co-citation relationships. Instead of using a reference-reference matrix, we directly use the original paper-reference matrix as the information source, and transform the paper-reference matrix into an FP-tree and visualize it in a Java-based prototype system. We demonstrate the usefulness of our approach through visual analyses of the intellectual structure of two domains: information visualization and Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). The results show that our visualization not only retains the major information of co-citation relationships, but also reveals more detailed sub-structures of tightly knit clusters than a conventional node-link network visualization.
infovis-2009-36	Exemplar-based Visualization of Large Document Corpus. With the rapid growth of the World Wide Web and electronic information services, text corpus is becoming available online at an incredible rate. By displaying text data in a logical layout (e.g., color graphs), text visualization presents a direct way to observe the documents as well as understand the relationship between them. In this paper, we propose a novel technique, Exemplar-based visualization (EV), to visualize an extremely large text corpus. Capitalizing on recent advances in matrix approximation and decomposition, EV presents a probabilistic multidimensional projection model in the low-rank text subspace with a sound objective function. The probability of each document proportion to the topics is obtained through iterative optimization and embedded to a low dimensional space using parameter embedding. By selecting the representative exemplars, we obtain a compact approximation of the data. This makes the visualization highly efficient and flexible. In addition, the selected exemplars neatly summarize the entire data set and greatly reduce the cognitive overload in the visualization, leading to an easier interpretation of large text corpus. Empirically, we demonstrate the superior performance of EV through extensive experiments performed on the publicly available text data sets.
infovis-2009-37	Mapping Text with Phrase Nets. We present a new technique, the phrase net, for generating visual overviews of unstructured text. A phrase net displays a graph whose nodes are words and whose edges indicate that two words are linked by a user-specified relation. These relations may be defined either at the syntactic or lexical level; different relations often produce very different perspectives on the same text. Taken together, these perspectives often provide an illuminating visual overview of the key concepts and relations in a document or set of documents.
infovis-2010-01	Necklace Maps. Statistical data associated with geographic regions is nowadays globally available in large amounts and hence automated methods to visually display these data are in high demand. There are several well-established thematic map types for quantitative data on the ratio-scale associated with regions: choropleth maps, cartograms, and proportional symbol maps. However, all these maps suffer from limitations, especially if large data values are associated with small regions. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel type of quantitative thematic map, the necklace map. In a necklace map, the regions of the underlying two-dimensional map are projected onto intervals on a one-dimensional curve (the necklace) that surrounds the map regions. Symbols are scaled such that their area corresponds to the data of their region and placed without overlap inside the corresponding interval on the necklace. Necklace maps appear clear and uncluttered and allow for comparatively large symbol sizes. They visualize data sets well which are not proportional to region sizes. The linear ordering of the symbols along the necklace facilitates an easy comparison of symbol sizes. One map can contain several nested or disjoint necklaces to visualize clustered data. The advantages of necklace maps come at a price: the association between a symbol and its region is weaker than with other types of maps. Interactivity can help to strengthen this association if necessary. We present an automated approach to generate necklace maps which allows the user to interactively control the final symbol placement. We validate our approach with experiments using various data sets and maps.
infovis-2010-02	Rethinking Map Legends with Visualization. This design paper presents new guidance for creating map legends in a dynamic environment. Our contribution is a set ofguidelines for legend design in a visualization context and a series of illustrative themes through which they may be expressed. Theseare demonstrated in an applications context through interactive software prototypes. The guidelines are derived from cartographicliterature and in liaison with EDINA who provide digital mapping services for UK tertiary education. They enhance approaches tolegend design that have evolved for static media with visualization by considering: selection, layout, symbols, position, dynamismand design and process. Broad visualization legend themes include: The Ground Truth Legend, The Legend as Statistical Graphicand The Map is the Legend. Together, these concepts enable us to augment legends with dynamic properties that address specificneeds, rethink their nature and role and contribute to a wider re-evaluation of maps as artifacts of usage rather than statements offact. EDINA has acquired funding to enhance their clients with visualization legends that use these concepts as a consequence ofthis work. The guidance applies to the design of a wide range of legends and keys used in cartography and information visualization.
infovis-2010-03	SignalLens: Focus+Context Applied to Electronic Time Series. Electronic test and measurement systems are becoming increasingly sophisticated in order to match the increased complexity and ultra-high speed of the devices under test. A key feature in many such instruments is a vastly increased capacity for storage of digital signals. Storage of 109 time points or more is now possible. At the same time, the typical screens on such measurement devices are relatively small. Therefore, these instruments can only render an extremely small fraction of the complete signal at any time. SignalLens uses a Focus+Context approach to provide a means of navigating to and inspecting low-level signal details in the context of the entire signal trace. This approach provides a compact visualization suitable for embedding into the small displays typically provided by electronic measurement instruments. We further augment this display with computed tracks which display time-aligned computed properties of the signal. By combining and filtering these computed tracks it is possible to easily and quickly find computationally detected features in the data which are often obscured by the visual compression required to render the large data sets on a small screen. Further, these tracks can be viewed in the context of the entire signal trace as well as visible high-level signal features. Several examples using real-world electronic measurement data are presented, which demonstrate typical use cases and the effectiveness of the design.
infovis-2010-04	MulteeSum: A Tool for Comparative Spatial and Temporal Gene Expression Data. Cells in an organism share the same genetic information in their DNA, but have very different forms and behavior because of the selective expression of subsets of their genes. The widely used approach of measuring gene expression over time from a tissue sample using techniques such as microarrays or sequencing do not provide information about the spatial position with in the tissue where these genes are expressed. In contrast, we are working with biologists who use techniques that measure gene expression in every individual cell of entire fruitfly embryos over an hour of their development, and do so for multiple closely-related subspecies of Drosophila. These scientists are faced with the challenge of integrating temporal gene expression data with the spatial location of cells and, moreover, comparing this data across multiple related species. We have worked with these biologists over the past two years to develop MulteeSum, a visualization system that supports inspection and curation of data sets showing gene expression over time, in conjunction with the spatial location of the cells where the genes are expressed - it is the first tool to support comparisons across multiple such data sets. MulteeSum is part of a general and flexible framework we developed with our collaborators that is built around multiple summaries for each cell, allowing the biologists to explore the results of computations that mix spatial information, gene expression measurements over time, and data from multiple related species or organisms. We justify our design decisions based on specific descriptions of the analysis needs of our collaborators, and provide anecdotal evidence of the efficacy of MulteeSum through a series of case studies.
infovis-2010-05	Gremlin: An Interactive Visualization Model for Analyzing Genomic Rearrangements. In this work we present, apply, and evaluate a novel, interactive visualization model for comparative analysis of structural variants and rearrangements in human and cancer genomes, with emphasis on data integration and uncertainty visualization. To support both global trend analysis and local feature detection, this model enables explorations continuously scaled from the high-level, complete genome perspective, down to the low-level, structural rearrangement view, while preserving global context at all times. We have implemented these techniques in Gremlin, a genomic rearrangement explorer with multi-scale, linked interactions, which we apply to four human cancer genome data sets for evaluation. Using an insight-based evaluation methodology, we compare Gremlin to Circos, the state-of-the-art in genomic rearrangement visualization, through a small user study with computational biologists working in rearrangement analysis. Results from user study evaluations demonstrate that this visualization model enables more total insights, more insights per minute, and more complex insights than the current state-of-the-art for visual analysis and exploration of genome rearrangements.
infovis-2010-06	Graphical Perception of Multiple Time Series. Line graphs have been the visualization of choice for temporal data ever since the days of William Playfair (1759-1823), but realistic temporal analysis tasks often include multiple simultaneous time series. In this work, we explore user performance for comparison, slope, and discrimination tasks for different line graph techniques involving multiple time series. Our results show that techniques that create separate charts for each time series--such as small multiples and horizon graphs--are generally more efficient for comparisons across time series with a large visual span. On the other hand, shared-space techniques--like standard line graphs--are typically more efficient for comparisons over smaller visual spans where the impact of overlap and clutter is reduced.
infovis-2010-07	Uncovering Strengths and Weaknesses of Radial Visualizations-an Empirical Approach. Radial visualizations play an important role in the information visualization community. But the decision to choose a radial coordinate system is rather based on intuition than on scientific foundations. The empirical approach presented in this paper aims at uncovering strengths and weaknesses of radial visualizations by comparing them to equivalent ones in Cartesian coordinate systems. We identified memorizing positions of visual elements as a generic task when working with visualizations. A first study with 674 participants provides a broad data spectrum for exploring differences between the two visualization types. A second, complementing study with fewer participants focuses on further questions raised by the first study. Our findings document that Cartesian visualizations tend to outperform their radial counterparts especially with respect to answer times. Nonetheless, radial visualization seem to be more appropriate for focusing on a particular data dimension.
infovis-2010-08	How Information Visualization Novices Construct Visualizations. It remains challenging for information visualization novices to rapidly construct visualizations during exploratory data analysis. We conducted an exploratory laboratory study in which information visualization novices explored fictitious sales data by communicating visualization specifications to a human mediator, who rapidly constructed the visualizations using commercial visualization software. We found that three activities were central to the iterative visualization construction process: data attribute selection, visual template selection, and visual mapping specification. The major barriers faced by the participants were translating questions into data attributes, designing visual mappings, and interpreting the visualizations. Partial specification was common, and the participants used simple heuristics and preferred visualizations they were already familiar with, such as bar, line and pie charts. We derived abstract models from our observations that describe barriers in the data exploration process and uncovered how information visualization novices think about visualization specifications. Our findings support the need for tools that suggest potential visualizations and support iterative refinement, that provide explanations and help with learning, and that are tightly integrated into tool support for the overall visual analytics process.
infovis-2010-09	eSeeTrack - Visualizing Sequential Fixation Patterns. We introduce eSeeTrack, an eye-tracking visualization prototype that facilitates exploration and comparison of sequential gaze orderings in a static or a dynamic scene. It extends current eye-tracking data visualizations by extracting patterns of sequential gaze orderings, displaying these patterns in a way that does not depend on the number of fixations on a scene, and enabling users to compare patterns from two or more sets of eye-gaze data. Extracting such patterns was very difficult with previous visualization techniques. eSeeTrack combines a timeline and a tree-structured visual representation to embody three aspects of eye-tracking data that users are interested in: duration, frequency and orderings of fixations. We demonstrate the usefulness of eSeeTrack via two case studies on surgical simulation and retail store chain data. We found that eSeeTrack allows ordering of fixations to be rapidly queried, explored and compared. Furthermore, our tool provides an effective and efficient mechanism to determine pattern outliers. This approach can be effective for behavior analysis in a variety of domains that are described at the end of this paper.
infovis-2010-10	Evaluating the Impact of Task Demands and Block Resolution on the Effectiveness of Pixel-based Visualization. Pixel-based visualization is a popular method of conveying large amounts of numerical data graphically. Application scenarios include business and finance, bioinformatics and remote sensing. In this work, we examined how the usability of such visual representations varied across different tasks and block resolutions. The main stimuli consisted of temporal pixel-based visualization with a white-red color map, simulating monthly temperature variation over a six-year period. In the first study, we included 5 separate tasks to exert different perceptual loads. We found that performance varied considerably as a function of task, ranging from 75% correct in low-load tasks to below 40% in high-load tasks. There was a small but consistent effect of resolution, with the uniform patch improving performance by around 6% relative to higher block resolution. In the second user study, we focused on a high-load task for evaluating month-to-month changes across different regions of the temperature range. We tested both CIE L*u*v* and RGB color spaces. We found that the nature of the change-evaluation errors related directly to the distance between the compared regions in the mapped color space. We were able to reduce such errors by using multiple color bands for the same data range. In a final study, we examined more fully the influence of block resolution on performance, and found block resolution had a limited impact on the effectiveness of pixel-based visualization.
infovis-2010-11	Graphical Inference for Infovis. How do we know if what we see is really there? When visualizing data, how do we avoid falling into the trap of apophenia where we see patterns in random noise? Traditionally, infovis has been concerned with discovering new relationships, and statistics with preventing spurious relationships from being reported. We pull these opposing poles closer with two new techniques for rigorous statistical inference of visual discoveries. The "Rorschach" helps the analyst calibrate their understanding of uncertainty and "line-up" provides a protocol for assessing the significance of visual discoveries, protecting against the discovery of spurious structure.
infovis-2010-12	Matching Visual Saliency to Confidence in Plots of Uncertain Data. Conveying data uncertainty in visualizations is crucial for preventing viewers from drawing conclusions based on untrustworthy data points. This paper proposes a methodology for efficiently generating density plots of uncertain multivariate data sets that draws viewers to preattentively identify values of high certainty while not calling attention to uncertain values. We demonstrate how to augment scatter plots and parallel coordinates plots to incorporate statistically modeled uncertainty and show how to integrate them with existing multivariate analysis techniques, including outlier detection and interactive brushing. Computing high quality density plots can be expensive for large data sets, so we also describe a probabilistic plotting technique that summarizes the data without requiring explicit density plot computation. These techniques have been useful for identifying brain tumors in multivariate magnetic resonance spectroscopy data and we describe how to extend them to visualize ensemble data sets.
infovis-2010-13	Perceptual Guidelines for Creating Rectangular Treemaps. Treemaps are space-filling visualizations that make efficient use of limited display space to depict large amounts of hierarchical data. Creating perceptually effective treemaps requires carefully managing a number of design parameters including the aspect ratio and luminance of rectangles. Moreover, treemaps encode values using area, which has been found to be less accurate than judgments of other visual encodings, such as length. We conduct a series of controlled experiments aimed at producing a set of design guidelines for creating effective rectangular treemaps. We find no evidence that luminance affects area judgments, but observe that aspect ratio does have an effect. Specifically, we find that the accuracy of area comparisons suffers when the compared rectangles have extreme aspect ratios or when both are squares. Contrary to common assumptions, the optimal distribution of rectangle aspect ratios within a treemap should include non-squares, but should avoid extremes. We then compare treemaps with hierarchical bar chart displays to identify the data densities at which length-encoded bar charts become less effective than area-encoded treemaps. We report the transition points at which treemaps exhibit judgment accuracy on par with bar charts for both leaf and non-leaf tree nodes. We also find that even at relatively low data densities treemaps result in faster comparisons than bar charts. Based on these results, we present a set of guidelines for the effective use of treemaps and suggest alternate approaches for treemap layout.
infovis-2010-14	Mental Models, Visual Reasoning and Interaction in Information Visualization: A Top-down Perspective. Although previous research has suggested that examining the interplay between internal and external representations can benefit our understanding of the role of information visualization (InfoVis) in human cognitive activities, there has been little work detailing the nature of internal representations, the relationship between internal and external representations and how interaction is related to these representations. In this paper, we identify and illustrate a specific kind of internal representation, mental models, and outline the high-level relationships between mental models and external visualizations. We present a top-down perspective of reasoning as model construction and simulation, and discuss the role of visualization in model based reasoning. From this perspective, interaction can be understood as active modeling for three primary purposes: external anchoring, information foraging, and cognitive offloading. Finally we discuss the implications of our approach for design, evaluation and theory development.
infovis-2010-15	Laws of Attraction: From Perceived Forces to Conceptual Similarity. Many of the pressing questions in information visualization deal with how exactly a user reads a collection of visual marks as information about relationships between entities. Previous research has suggested that people see parts of a visualization as objects, and may metaphorically interpret apparent physical relationships between these objects as suggestive of data relationships. We explored this hypothesis in detail in a series of user experiments. Inspired by the concept of implied dynamics in psychology, we first studied whether perceived gravity acting on a mark in a scatterplot can lead to errors in a participant's recall of the mark's position. The results of this study suggested that such position errors exist, but may be more strongly influenced by attraction between marks. We hypothesized that such apparent attraction may be influenced by elements used to suggest relationship between objects, such as connecting lines, grouping elements, and visual similarity. We further studied what visual elements are most likely to cause this attraction effect, and whether the elements that best predicted attraction errors were also those which suggested conceptual relationships most strongly. Our findings show a correlation between attraction errors and intuitions about relatedness, pointing towards a possible mechanism by which the perception of visual marks becomes an interpretation of data relationships.
infovis-2010-16	Pargnostics: Screen-Space Metrics for Parallel Coordinates. Interactive visualization requires the translation of data into a screen space of limited resolution. While currently ignored by most visualization models, this translation entails a loss of information and the introduction of a number of artifacts that can be useful, (e.g., aggregation, structures) or distracting (e.g., over-plotting, clutter) for the analysis. This phenomenon is observed in parallel coordinates, where overlapping lines between adjacent axes form distinct patterns, representing the relation between variables they connect. However, even for a small number of dimensions, the challenge is to effectively convey the relationships for all combinations of dimensions. The size of the dataset and a large number of dimensions only add to the complexity of this problem. To address these issues, we propose Pargnostics, parallel coordinates diagnostics, a model based on screen-space metrics that quantify the different visual structures. Pargnostics metrics are calculated for pairs of axes and take into account the resolution of the display as well as potential axis inversions. Metrics include the number of line crossings, crossing angles, convergence, overplotting, etc. To construct a visualization view, the user can pick from a ranked display showing pairs of coordinate axes and the structures between them, or examine all possible combinations of axes at once in a matrix display. Picking the best axes layout is an NP-complete problem in general, but we provide a way of automatically optimizing the display according to the user's preferences based on our metrics and model.
infovis-2010-17	Comparative Analysis of Multidimensional, Quantitative Data. When analyzing multidimensional, quantitative data, the comparison of two or more groups of dimensions is a common task. Typical sources of such data are experiments in biology, physics or engineering, which are conducted in different configurations and use replicates to ensure statistically significant results. One common way to analyze this data is to filter it using statistical methods and then run clustering algorithms to group similar values. The clustering results can be visualized using heat maps, which show differences between groups as changes in color. However, in cases where groups of dimensions have an a priori meaning, it is not desirable to cluster all dimensions combined, since a clustering algorithm can fragment continuous blocks of records. Furthermore, identifying relevant elements in heat maps becomes more difficult as the number of dimensions increases. To aid in such situations, we have developed Matchmaker, a visualization technique that allows researchers to arbitrarily arrange and compare multiple groups of dimensions at the same time. We create separate groups of dimensions which can be clustered individually, and place them in an arrangement of heat maps reminiscent of parallel coordinates. To identify relations, we render bundled curves and ribbons between related records in different groups. We then allow interactive drill-downs using enlarged detail views of the data, which enable in-depth comparisons of clusters between groups. To reduce visual clutter, we minimize crossings between the views. This paper concludes with two case studies. The first demonstrates the value of our technique for the comparison of clustering algorithms. In the second, biologists use our system to investigate why certain strains of mice develop liver disease while others remain healthy, informally showing the efficacy of our system when analyzing multidimensional data containing distinct groups of dimensions.
infovis-2010-18	An Extension of Wilkinson's Algorithm for Positioning Tick Labels on Axes. The non-data components of a visualization, such as axes and legends, can often be just as important as the data itself. They provide contextual information essential to interpreting the data. In this paper, we describe an automated system for choosing positions and labels for axis tick marks. Our system extends Wilkinson's optimization-based labeling approach to create a more robust, full-featured axis labeler. We define an expanded space of axis labelings by automatically generating additional nice numbers as needed and by permitting the extreme labels to occur inside the data range. These changes provide flexibility in problematic cases, without degrading quality elsewhere. We also propose an additional optimization criterion, legibility, which allows us to simultaneously optimize over label formatting, font size, and orientation. To solve this revised optimization problem, we describe the optimization function and an efficient search algorithm. Finally, we compare our method to previous work using both quantitative and qualitative metrics. This paper is a good example of how ideas from automated graphic design can be applied to information visualization.
infovis-2010-19	Stacking Graphic Elements to Avoid Over-Plotting. An ongoing challenge for information visualization is how to deal with over-plotting forced by ties or the relatively limited visual field of display devices. A popular solution is to represent local data density with area (bubble plots, treemaps), color(heatmaps), or aggregation (histograms, kernel densities, pixel displays). All of these methods have at least one of three deficiencies:1) magnitude judgments are biased because area and color have convex downward perceptual functions, 2) area, hue, and brightnesshave relatively restricted ranges of perceptual intensity compared to length representations, and/or 3) it is difficult to brush or link toindividual cases when viewing aggregations. In this paper, we introduce a new technique for visualizing and interacting with datasets that preserves density information by stacking overlapping cases. The overlapping data can be points or lines or other geometric elements, depending on the type of plot. We show real-dataset applications of this stacking paradigm and compare them to other techniques that deal with over-plotting in high-dimensional displays.
infovis-2010-20	Visualization of Diversity in Large Multivariate Data Sets. Understanding the diversity of a set of multivariate objects is an important problem in many domains, including ecology, college admissions, investing, machine learning, and others. However, to date, very little work has been done to help users achieve this kind of understanding. Visual representation is especially appealing for this task because it offers the potential to allow users to efficiently observe the objects of interest in a direct and holistic way. Thus, in this paper, we attempt to formalize the problem of visualizing the diversity of a large (more than 1000 objects), multivariate (more than 5 attributes) data set as one worth deeper investigation by the information visualization community. In doing so, we contribute a precise definition of diversity, a set of requirements for diversity visualizations based on this definition, and a formal user study design intended to evaluate the capacity of a visual representation for communicating diversity information. Our primary contribution, however, is a visual representation, called the Diversity Map, for visualizing diversity. An evaluation of the Diversity Map using our study design shows that users can judge elements of diversity consistently and as or more accurately than when using the only other representation specifically designed to visualize diversity.
infovis-2010-21	PedVis: A Structured, Space-Efficient Technique for Pedigree Visualization. Public genealogical databases are becoming increasingly populated with historical data and records of the current population's ancestors. As this increasing amount of available information is used to link individuals to their ancestors, the resulting trees become deeper and more dense, which justifies the need for using organized, space-efficient layouts to display the data. Existing layouts are often only able to show a small subset of the data at a time. As a result, it is easy to become lost when navigating through the data or to lose sight of the overall tree structure. On the contrary, leaving space for unknown ancestors allows one to better understand the tree's structure, but leaving this space becomes expensive and allows fewer generations to be displayed at a time. In this work, we propose that the H-tree based layout be used in genealogical software to display ancestral trees. We will show that this layout presents an increase in the number of displayable generations, provides a nicely arranged, symmetrical, intuitive and organized fractal structure, increases the user's ability to understand and navigate through the data, and accounts for the visualization requirements necessary for displaying such trees. Finally, user-study results indicate potential for user acceptance of the new layout.
infovis-2010-22	GeneaQuilts: A System for Exploring Large Genealogies. GeneaQuilts is a new visualization technique for representing large genealogies of up to several thousand individuals. The visualization takes the form of a diagonally-filled matrix, where rows are individuals and columns are nuclear families. After identifying the major tasks performed in genealogical research and the limits of current software, we present an interactive genealogy exploration system based on GeneaQuilts. The system includes an overview, a timeline, search and filtering components, and a new interaction technique called Bring & Slide that allows fluid navigation in very large genealogies. We report on preliminary feedback from domain experts and show how our system supports a number of their tasks.
infovis-2010-23	Visualization of Graph Products. Graphs are a versatile structure and abstraction for binary relationships between objects. To gain insight into such relationships, their corresponding graph can be visualized. In the past, many classes of graphs have been defined, e.g. trees, planar graphs, directed acyclic graphs, and visualization algorithms were proposed for these classes. Although many graphs may only be classified as "general" graphs, they can contain substructures that belong to a certain class. Archambault proposed the TopoLayout framework: rather than draw any arbitrary graph using one method, split the graph into components that are homogeneous with respect to one graph class and then draw each component with an algorithm best suited for this class. Graph products constitute a class that arises frequently in graph theory, but for which no visualization algorithm has been proposed until now. In this paper, we present an algorithm for drawing graph products and the aesthetic criterion graph product's drawings are subject to. We show that the popular High-Dimensional Embedder approach applied to cartesian products already respects this aestetic criterion, but has disadvantages. We also present how our method is integrated as a new component into the TopoLayout framework. Our implementation is used for further research of graph products in a biological context.
infovis-2010-24	Untangling Euler Diagrams. In many common data analysis scenarios the data elements are logically grouped into sets. Venn and Euler style diagrams are a common visual representation of such set membership where the data elements are represented by labels or glyphs and sets are indicated by boundaries surrounding their members. Generating such diagrams automatically such that set regions do not intersect unless the corresponding sets have a non-empty intersection is a difficult problem. Further, it may be impossible in some cases if regions are required to be continuous and convex. Several approaches exist to draw such set regions using more complex shapes, however, the resulting diagrams can be difficult to interpret. In this paper we present two novel approaches for simplifying a complex collection of intersecting sets into a strict hierarchy that can be more easily automatically arranged and drawn (Figure 1). In the first approach, we use compact rectangular shapes for drawing each set, attempting to improve the readability of the set intersections. In the second approach, we avoid drawing intersecting set regions by duplicating elements belonging to multiple sets. We compared both of our techniques to the traditional non-convex region technique using five readability tasks. Our results show that the compact rectangular shapes technique was often preferred by experimental subjects even though the use of duplications dramatically improves the accuracy and performance time for most of our tasks. In addition to general set representation our techniques are also applicable to visualization of networks with intersecting clusters of nodes.
infovis-2010-25	The FlowVizMenu and Parallel Scatterplot Matrix: Hybrid Multidimensional Visualizations for Network Exploration. A standard approach for visualizing multivariate networks is to use one or more multidimensional views (for example, scatterplots) for selecting nodes by various metrics, possibly coordinated with a node-link view of the network. In this paper, we present three novel approaches for achieving a tighter integration of these views through hybrid techniques for multidimensional visualization, graph selection and layout. First, we present the FlowVizMenu, a radial menu containing a scatterplot that can be popped up transiently and manipulated with rapid, fluid gestures to select and modify the axes of its scatterplot. Second, the FlowVizMenu can be used to steer an attribute-driven layout of the network, causing certain nodes of a node-link diagram to move toward their corresponding positions in a scatterplot while others can be positioned manually or by force-directed layout. Third, we describe a novel hybrid approach that combines a scatterplot matrix (SPLOM) and parallel coordinates called the Parallel Scatterplot Matrix (P-SPLOM), which can be used to visualize and select features within the network. We also describe a novel arrangement of scatterplots called the Scatterplot Staircase (SPLOS) that requires less space than a traditional scatterplot matrix. Initial user feedback is reported.
infovis-2010-26	OpinionSeer: Interactive Visualization of Hotel Customer Feedback. The rapid development of Web technology has resulted in an increasing number of hotel customers sharing their opinions on the hotel services. Effective visual analysis of online customer opinions is needed, as it has a significant impact on building a successful business. In this paper, we present OpinionSeer, an interactive visualization system that could visually analyze a large collection of online hotel customer reviews. The system is built on a new visualization-centric opinion mining technique that considers uncertainty for faithfully modeling and analyzing customer opinions. A new visual representation is developed to convey customer opinions by augmenting well-established scatterplots and radial visualization. To provide multiple-level exploration, we introduce subjective logic to handle and organize subjective opinions with degrees of uncertainty. Several case studies illustrate the effectiveness and usefulness of OpinionSeer on analyzing relationships among multiple data dimensions and comparing opinions of different groups. Aside from data on hotel customer feedback, OpinionSeer could also be applied to visually analyze customer opinions on other products or services.
infovis-2010-27	The Streams of Our Lives: Visualizing Listening Histories in Context. The choices we take when listening to music are expressions of our personal taste and character. Storing and accessing our listening histories is trivial due to services like Last.fm, but learning from them and understanding them is not. Existing solutions operate at a very abstract level and only produce statistics. By applying techniques from information visualization to this problem, we were able to provide average people with a detailed and powerful tool for accessing their own musical past. LastHistory is an interactive visualization for displaying music listening histories, along with contextual information from personal photos and calendar entries. Its two main user tasks are (1) analysis, with an emphasis on temporal patterns and hypotheses related to musical genre and sequences, and (2) reminiscing, where listening histories and context represent part of one's past. In this design study paper we give an overview of the field of music listening histories and explain their unique characteristics as a type of personal data. We then describe the design rationale, data and view transformations of LastHistory and present the results from both a laband a large-scale online study. We also put listening histories in contrast to other lifelogging data. The resonant and enthusiastic feedback that we received from average users shows a need for making their personal data accessible. We hope to stimulate such developments through this research.
infovis-2010-28	A Visual Backchannel for Large-Scale Events. We introduce the concept of a Visual Backchannel as a novel way of following and exploring online conversations about large-scale events. Microblogging communities, such as Twitter, are increasingly used as digital backchannels for timely exchange of brief comments and impressions during political speeches, sport competitions, natural disasters, and other large events. Currently, shared updates are typically displayed in the form of a simple list, making it difficult to get an overview of the fast-paced discussions as it happens in the moment and how it evolves over time. In contrast, our Visual Backchannel design provides an evolving, interactive, and multi-faceted visual overview of large-scale ongoing conversations on Twitter. To visualize a continuously updating information stream, we include visual saliency for what is happening now and what has just happened, set in the context of the evolving conversation. As part of a fully web-based coordinated-view system we introduce Topic Streams, a temporally adjustable stacked graph visualizing topics over time, a People Spiral representing participants and their activity, and an Image Cloud encoding the popularity of event photos by size. Together with a post listing, these mutually linked views support cross-filtering along topics, participants, and time ranges. We discuss our design considerations, in particular with respect to evolving visualizations of dynamically changing data. Initial feedback indicates significant interest and suggests several unanticipated uses.
infovis-2010-29	Narrative Visualization: Telling Stories with Data. Data visualization is regularly promoted for its ability to reveal stories within data, yet these data stories? differ in important ways from traditional forms of storytelling. Storytellers, especially online journalists, have increasingly been integrating visualizations into their narratives, in some cases allowing the visualization to function in place of a written story. In this paper, we systematically review the design space of this emerging class of visualizations. Drawing on case studies from news media to visualization research, we identify distinct genres of narrative visualization. We characterize these design differences, together with interactivity and messaging, in terms of the balance between the narrative flow intended by the author (imposed by graphical elements and the interface) and story discovery on the part of the reader (often through interactive exploration). Our framework suggests design strategies for narrative visualization, including promising under-explored approaches to journalistic storytelling and educational media.
infovis-2010-30	Declarative Language Design for Interactive Visualization. We investigate the design of declarative, domain-specific languages for constructing interactive visualizations. By separating specification from execution, declarative languages can simplify development, enable unobtrusive optimization, and support retargeting across platforms. We describe the design of the Protovis specification language and its implementation within an object-oriented, statically-typed programming language (Java). We demonstrate how to support rich visualizations without requiring a toolkit-specific data model and extend Protovis to enable declarative specification of animated transitions. To support cross-platform deployment, we introduce rendering and event-handling infrastructures decoupled from the runtime platform, letting designers retarget visualization specifications (e.g., from desktop to mobile phone) with reduced effort. We also explore optimizations such as runtime compilation of visualization specifications, parallelized execution, and hardware-accelerated rendering. We present benchmark studies measuring the performance gains provided by these optimizations and compare performance to existing Java-based visualization tools, demonstrating scalability improvements exceeding an order of magnitude.
infovis-2010-31	Visualizations Everywhere: A Multiplatform Infrastructure for Linked Visualizations. In order to use new visualizations, most toolkits require application developers to rebuild their applications and distribute new versions to users. The WebCharts Framework take a different approach by hosting Javascript from within an application and providing a standard data and events interchange.. In this way, applications can be extended dynamically, with a wide variety of visualizations. We discuss the benefits of this architectural approach, contrast it to existing techniques, and give a variety of examples and extensions of the basic system.
infovis-2010-32	behaviorism : A Framework for Dynamic Data Visualization. While a number of information visualization software frameworks exist, creating new visualizations, especially those that involve novel visualization metaphors, interaction techniques, data analysis strategies, and specialized rendering algorithms, is still often a difficult process. To facilitate the creation of novel visualizations we present a new software framework, behaviorism, which provides a wide range of flexibility when working with dynamic information on visual, temporal, and ontological levels, but at the same time providing appropriate abstractions which allow developers to create prototypes quickly which can then easily be turned into robust systems. The core of the framework is a set of three interconnected graphs, each with associated operators: a scene graph for high-performance 3D rendering, a data graph for different layers of semantically linked heterogeneous data, and a timing graph for sophisticated control of scheduling, interaction, and animation. In particular, the timing graph provides a unified system to add behaviors to both data and visual elements, as well as to the behaviors themselves. To evaluate the framework we look briefly at three different projects all of which required novel visualizations in different domains, and all of which worked with dynamic data in different ways: an interactive ecological simulation, an information art installation, and an information visualization technique.
infovis-2010-33	FacetAtlas: Multifaceted Visualization for Rich Text Corpora. Documents in rich text corpora usually contain multiple facets of information. For example, an article about a specific disease often consists of different facets such as symptom, treatment, cause, diagnosis, prognosis, and prevention. Thus, documents may have different relations based on different facets. Powerful search tools have been developed to help users locate lists of individual documents that are most related to specific keywords. However, there is a lack of effective analysis tools that reveal the multifaceted relations of documents within or cross the document clusters. In this paper, we present FacetAtlas, a multifaceted visualization technique for visually analyzing rich text corpora. FacetAtlas combines search technology with advanced visual analytical tools to convey both global and local patterns simultaneously. We describe several unique aspects of FacetAtlas, including (1) node cliques and multifaceted edges, (2) an optimized density map, and (3) automated opacity pattern enhancement for highlighting visual patterns, (4) interactive context switch between facets. In addition, we demonstrate the power of FacetAtlas through a case study that targets patient education in the health care domain. Our evaluation shows the benefits of this work, especially in support of complex multifaceted data analysis.
infovis-2010-34	SparkClouds: Visualizing Trends in Tag Clouds. Tag clouds have proliferated over the web over the last decade. They provide a visual summary of a collection of texts by visually depicting the tag frequency by font size. In use, tag clouds can evolve as the associated data source changes over time. Interesting discussions around tag clouds often include a series of tag clouds and consider how they evolve over time. However, since tag clouds do not explicitly represent trends or support comparisons, the cognitive demands placed on the person for perceiving trends in multiple tag clouds are high. In this paper, we introduce SparkClouds, which integrate sparklines into a tag cloud to convey trends between multiple tag clouds. We present results from a controlled study that compares SparkClouds with two traditional trend visualizations-multiple line graphs and stacked bar charts-as well as Parallel Tag Clouds. Results show that SparkClouds' ability to show trends compares favourably to the alternative visualizations.
infovis-2010-35	ManiWordle: Providing Flexible Control over Wordle. Among the multifarious tag-clouding techniques, Wordle stands out to the community by providing an aesthetic layout, eliciting the emergence of the participatory culture and usage of tag-clouding in the artistic creations. In this paper, we introduce ManiWordle, a Wordle-based visualization tool that revamps interactions with the layout by supporting custom manipulations. ManiWordle allows people to manipulate typography, color, and composition not only for the layout as a whole, but also for the individual words, enabling them to have better control over the layout result. We first describe our design rationale along with the interaction techniques for tweaking the layout. We then present the results both from the preliminary usability study and from the comparative study between ManiWordle and Wordle. The results suggest that ManiWordle provides higher user satisfaction and an efficient method of creating the desired "art work," harnessing the power behind the ever-increasing popularity of Wordle.
infovis-2011-01	Quality Metrics in High-Dimensional Data Visualization: An Overview and Systematization. In this paper, we present a systematization of techniques that use quality metrics to help in the visual exploration of meaningful patterns in high-dimensional data. In a number of recent papers, different quality metrics are proposed to automate the demanding search through large spaces of alternative visualizations (e.g., alternative projections or ordering), allowing the user to concentrate on the most promising visualizations suggested by the quality metrics. Over the last decade, this approach has witnessed a remarkable development but few reflections exist on how these methods are related to each other and how the approach can be developed further. For this purpose, we provide an overview of approaches that use quality metrics in high-dimensional data visualization and propose a systematization based on a thorough literature review. We carefully analyze the papers and derive a set of factors for discriminating the quality metrics, visualization techniques, and the process itself. The process is described through a reworked version of the well-known information visualization pipeline. We demonstrate the usefulness of our model by applying it to several existing approaches that use quality metrics, and we provide reflections on implications of our model for future research.
infovis-2011-02	Benefitting InfoVis with Visual Difficulties. Many well-cited theories for visualization design state that a visual representation should be optimized for quick and immediate interpretation by a user. Distracting elements like decorative "chartjunk" or extraneous information are avoided so as not to slow comprehension. Yet several recent studies in visualization research provide evidence that non-efficient visual elements may benefit comprehension and recall on the part of users. Similarly, findings from studies related to learning from visual displays in various subfields of psychology suggest that introducing cognitive difficulties to visualization interaction can improve a user's understanding of important information. In this paper, we synthesize empirical results from cross-disciplinary research on visual information representations, providing a counterpoint to efficiency-based design theory with guidelines that describe how visual difficulties can be introduced to benefit comprehension and recall. We identify conditions under which the application of visual difficulties is appropriate based on underlying factors in visualization interaction like active processing and engagement. We characterize effective graph design as a trade-off between efficiency and learning difficulties in order to provide Information Visualization (InfoVis) researchers and practitioners with a framework for organizing explorations of graphs for which comprehension and recall are crucial. We identify implications of this view for the design and evaluation of information visualizations.
infovis-2011-03	Product Plots. We propose a new framework for visualising tables of counts, proportions and probabilities. We call our framework product plots, alluding to the computation of area as a product of height and width, and the statistical concept of generating a joint distribution from the product of conditional and marginal distributions. The framework, with extensions, is sufficient to encompass over 20 visualisations previously described in fields of statistical graphics and infovis, including bar charts, mosaic plots, treemaps, equal area plots and fluctuation diagrams.
infovis-2011-04	Visualization Rhetoric: Framing Effects in Narrative Visualization. Narrative visualizations combine conventions of communicative and exploratory information visualization to convey an intended story. We demonstrate visualization rhetoric as an analytical framework for understanding how design techniques that prioritize particular interpretations in visualizations that "tell a story" can significantly affect end-user interpretation. We draw a parallel between narrative visualization interpretation and evidence from framing studies in political messaging, decision-making, and literary studies. Devices for understanding the rhetorical nature of narrative information visualizations are presented, informed by the rigorous application of concepts from critical theory, semiotics, journalism, and political theory. We draw attention to how design tactics represent additions or omissions of information at various levels&#8722;the data, visual representation, textual annotations, and interactivity&#8722;and how visualizations denote and connote phenomena with reference to unstated viewing conventions and codes. Classes of rhetorical techniques identified via a systematic analysis of recent narrative visualizations are presented, and characterized according to their rhetorical contribution to the visualization. We describe how designers and researchers can benefit from the potentially positive aspects of visualization rhetoric in designing engaging, layered narrative visualizations and how our framework can shed light on how a visualization design prioritizes specific interpretations. We identify areas where future inquiry into visualization rhetoric can improve understanding of visualization interpretation.
infovis-2011-05	Adaptive Privacy-Preserving Visualization Using Parallel Coordinates. Current information visualization techniques assume unrestricted access to data. However, privacy protection is a key issue for a lot of real-world data analyses. Corporate data, medical records, etc. are rich in analytical value but cannot be shared without first going through a transformation step where explicit identifiers are removed and the data is sanitized. Researchers in the field of data mining have proposed different techniques over the years for privacy-preserving data publishing and subsequent mining techniques on such sanitized data. A well-known drawback in these methods is that for even a small guarantee of privacy, the utility of the datasets is greatly reduced. In this paper, we propose an adaptive technique for privacy preser vation in parallel coordinates. Based on knowledge about the sensitivity of the data, we compute a clustered representation on the fly, which allows the user to explore the data without breaching privacy. Through the use of screen-space privacy metrics, the technique adapts to the user's screen parameters and interaction. We demonstrate our method in a case study and discuss potential attack scenarios.
infovis-2011-06	Context-Preserving Visual Links. Evaluating, comparing, and interpreting related pieces of information are tasks that are commonly performed during visual data analysis and in many kinds of information-intensive work. Synchronized visual highlighting of related elements is a well-known technique used to assist this task. An alternative approach, which is more invasive but also more expressive is visual linking in which line connections are rendered between related elements. In this work, we present context-preserving visual links as a new method for generating visual links. The method specifically aims to fulfill the following two goals: first, visual links should minimize the occlusion of important information; second, links should visually stand out from surrounding information by minimizing visual interference. We employ an image-based analysis of visual saliency to determine the important regions in the original representation. A consequence of the image-based approach is that our technique is application-independent and can be employed in a large number of visual data analysis scenarios in which the underlying content cannot or should not be altered. We conducted a controlled experiment that indicates that users can find linked elements in complex visualizations more quickly and with greater subjective satisfaction than in complex visualizations in which plain highlighting is used. Context-preserving visual links were perceived as visually more attractive than traditional visual links that do not account for the context information.
infovis-2011-07	Design Study of LineSets, a Novel Set Visualization Technique. Computing and visualizing sets of elements and their relationships is one of the most common tasks one performs when analyzing and organizing large amounts of data. Common representations of sets such as convex or concave geometries can become cluttered and difficult to parse when these sets overlap in multiple or complex ways, e.g., when multiple elements belong to multiple sets. In this paper, we present a design study of a novel set visual representation, LineSets, consisting of a curve connecting all of the sets elements. Our approach to design the visualization differs from traditional methodology used by the InfoVis community. We first explored the potential of the visualization concept by running a controlled experiment comparing our design sketches to results from the state-of-the-art technique. Our results demonstrated that LineSets are advantageous for certain tasks when compared to concave shapes. We discuss an implementation of LineSets based on simple heuristics and present a study demonstrating that our generated curves do as well as human-drawn ones. Finally, we present two applications of our technique in the context of search tasks on a map and community analysis tasks in social networks.
infovis-2011-08	Developing and Evaluating Quilts for the Depiction of Large Layered Graphs. Traditional layered graph depictions such as flow charts are in wide use. Yet as graphs grow more complex, these depictions can become difficult to understand. Quilts are matrix-based depictions for layered graphs designed to address this problem. In this research, we first improve Quilts by developing three design alternatives, and then compare the best of these alternatives to better-known node-link and matrix depictions. A primary weakness in Quilts is their depiction of skip links, links that do not simply connect to a succeeding layer. Therefore in our first study, we compare Quilts using color-only, text-only, and mixed (color and text) skip link depictions, finding that path finding with the color-only depiction is significantly slower and less accurate, and that in certain cases, the mixed depiction offers an advantage over the text-only depiction. In our second study, we compare Quilts using the mixed depiction to node-link diagrams and centered matrices. Overall results show that users can find paths through graphs significantly faster with Quilts (46.6 secs) than with node-link (58.3 secs) or matrix (71.2 secs) diagrams. This speed advantage is still greater in large graphs (e.g. in 200 node graphs, 55.4 secs vs. 71.1 secs for node-link and 84.2 secs for matrix depictions).
infovis-2011-09	Arc Length-based Aspect Ratio Selection. The aspect ratio of a plot has a dramatic impact on our ability to perceive trends and patterns in the data. Previous approaches for automatically selecting the aspect ratio have been based on adjusting the orientations or angles of the line segments in the plot. In contrast, we recommend a simple, effective method for selecting the aspect ratio: minimize the arc length of the data curve while keeping the area of the plot constant. The approach is parameterization invariant, robust to a wide range of inputs, preserves visual symmetries in the data, and is a compromise between previously proposed techniques. Further, we demonstrate that it can be effectively used to select the aspect ratio of contour plots. We believe arc length should become the default aspect ratio selection method.
infovis-2011-10	Asymmetric Relations in Longitudinal Social Networks. In modeling and analysis of longitudinal social networks, visual exploration is used in particular to complement and inform other methods. The most common graphical representations for this purpose appear to be animations and small multiples of intermediate states, depending on the type of media available. We present an alternative approach based on matrix representation of gestaltlines (a combination of Tufte's sparklines with glyphs based on gestalt theory). As a result, we obtain static, compact, yet data-rich diagrams that support specifically the exploration of evolving dyadic relations and persistent group structure, although at the expense of cross-sectional network views and indirect linkages.
infovis-2011-11	VisBricks: Multiform Visualization of Large, Inhomogeneous Data. Large volumes of real-world data often exhibit inhomogeneities: vertically in the form of correlated or independent dimensions and horizontally in the form of clustered or scattered data items. In essence, these inhomogeneities form the patterns in the data that researchers are trying to find and understand. Sophisticated statistical methods are available to reveal these patterns, however, the visualization of their outcomes is mostly still performed in a one-view-fits-all manner. In contrast, our novel visualization approach, VisBricks, acknowledges the inhomogeneity of the data and the need for different visualizations that suit the individual characteristics of the different data subsets. The overall visualization of the entire data set is patched together from smaller visualizations, there is one VisBrick for each cluster in each group of interdependent dimensions. Whereas the total impression of all VisBricks together gives a comprehensive high-level overview of the different groups of data, each VisBrick independently shows the details of the group of data it represents. State-of-the-art brushing and visual linking between all VisBricks furthermore allows the comparison of the groupings and the distribution of data items among them. In this paper, we introduce the VisBricks visualization concept, discuss its design rationale and implementation, and demonstrate its usefulness by applying it to a use case from the field of biomedicine.
infovis-2011-12	D3: Data-Driven Documents. Data-Driven Documents (D3) is a novel representation-transparent approach to visualization for the web. Rather than hide the underlying scenegraph within a toolkit-specific abstraction, D3 enables direct inspection and manipulation of a native representation: the standard document object model (DOM). With D3, designers selectively bind input data to arbitrary document elements, applying dynamic transforms to both generate and modify content. We show how representational transparency improves expressiveness and better integrates with developer tools than prior approaches, while offering comparable notational efficiency and retaining powerful declarative components. Immediate evaluation of operators further simplifies debugging and allows iterative development. Additionally, we demonstrate how D3 transforms naturally enable animation and interaction with dramatic performance improvements over intermediate representations.
infovis-2011-13	Flexible Linked Axes for Multivariate Data Visualization. Multivariate data visualization is a classic topic, for which many solutions have been proposed, each with its own strengths and weaknesses. In standard solutions the structure of the visualization is fixed, we explore how to give the user more freedom to define visualizations. Our new approach is based on the usage of Flexible Linked Axes: The user is enabled to define a visualization by drawing and linking axes on a canvas. Each axis has an associated attribute and range, which can be adapted. Links between pairs of axes are used to show data in either scatter plot- or Parallel Coordinates Plot-style. Flexible Linked Axes enable users to define a wide variety of different visualizations. These include standard methods, such as scatter plot matrices, radar charts, and PCPs [11]; less well known approaches, such as Hyperboxes [1], TimeWheels [17], and many-to-many relational parallel coordinate displays [14]; and also custom visualizations, consisting of combinations of scatter plots and PCPs. Furthermore, our method allows users to define composite visualizations that automatically support brushing and linking. We have discussed our approach with ten prospective users, who found the concept easy to understand and highly promising.
infovis-2011-14	Synthetic Generation of High-dimensional Datasets. Generation of synthetic datasets is a common practice in many research areas. Such data is often generated to meet specific needs or certain conditions that may not be easily found in the original, real data. The nature of the data varies according to the application area and includes text, graphs, social or weather data, among many others. The common process to create such synthetic datasets is to implement small scripts or programs, restricted to small problems or to a specific application. In this paper we propose a framework designed to generate high dimensional datasets. Users can interactively create and navigate through multi dimensional datasets using a suitable graphical user-interface. The data creation is driven by statistical distributions based on a few user-defined parameters. First, a grounding dataset is created according to given inputs, and then structures and trends are included in selected dimensions and orthogonal projection planes. Furthermore, our framework supports the creation of complex non-orthogonal trends and classified datasets. It can successfully be used to create synthetic datasets simulating important trends as multidimensional clusters, correlations and outliers.
infovis-2011-15	Stereoscopic Highlighting: 2D Graph Visualization on Stereo Displays. In this paper we present a new technique and prototype graph visualization system, stereoscopic highlighting, to help answer accessibility and adjacency queries when interacting with a node-link diagram. Our technique utilizes stereoscopic depth to highlight regions of interest in a 2D graph by projecting these parts onto a plane closer to the viewpoint of the user. This technique aims to isolate and magnify specific portions of the graph that need to be explored in detail without resorting to other highlighting techniques like color or motion, which can then be reserved to encode other data attributes. This mechanism of stereoscopic highlighting also enables focus+context views by juxtaposing a detailed image of a region of interest with the overall graph, which is visualized at a further depth with correspondingly less detail. In order to validate our technique, we ran a controlled experiment with 16 subjects comparing static visual highlighting to stereoscopic highlighting on 2D and 3D graph layouts for a range of tasks. Our results show that while for most tasks the difference in performance between stereoscopic highlighting alone and static visual highlighting is not statistically significant, users performed better when both highlighting methods were used concurrently. In more complicated tasks, 3D layout with static visual highlighting outperformed 2D layouts with a single highlighting method. However, it did not outperform the 2D layout utilizing both highlighting techniques simultaneously. Based on these results, we conclude that stereoscopic highlighting is a promising technique that can significantly enhance graph visualizations for certain use cases.
infovis-2011-16	In Situ Exploration of Large Dynamic Networks. The analysis of large dynamic networks poses a challenge in many fields, ranging from large bot-nets to social networks. As dynamic networks exhibit different characteristics, e.g., being of sparse or dense structure, or having a continuous or discrete time line, a variety of visualization techniques have been specifically designed to handle these different aspects of network structure and time. This wide range of existing techniques is well justified, as rarely a single visualization is suitable to cover the entire visual analysis. Instead, visual representations are often switched in the course of the exploration of dynamic graphs as the focus of analysis shifts between the temporal and the structural aspects of the data. To support such a switching in a seamless and intuitive manner, we introduce the concept of in situ visualization&#8211; a novel strategy that tightly integrates existing visualization techniques for dynamic networks. It does so by allowing the user to interactively select in a base visualization a region for which a different visualization technique is then applied and embedded in the selection made. This permits to change the way a locally selected group of data items, such as nodes or time points, are shown &#8211; right in the place where they are positioned, thus supporting the user's overall mental map. Using this approach, a user can switch seamlessly between different visual representations to adapt a region of a base visualization to the specifics of the data within it or to the current analysis focus. This paper presents and discusses the in situ visualization strategy and its implications for dynamic graph visualization. Furthermore, it illustrates its usefulness by employing it for the visual exploration of dynamic networks from two different fields: model versioning and wireless mesh networks.
infovis-2011-17	Parallel Edge Splatting for Scalable Dynamic Graph Visualization. We present a novel dynamic graph visualization technique based on node-link diagrams. The graphs are drawn side-byside from left to right as a sequence of narrow stripes that are placed perpendicular to the horizontal time line. The hierarchically organized vertices of the graphs are arranged on vertical, parallel lines that bound the stripes; directed edges connect these vertices from left to right. To address massive overplotting of edges in huge graphs, we employ a splatting approach that transforms the edges to a pixel-based scalar field. This field represents the edge densities in a scalable way and is depicted by non-linear color mapping. The visualization method is complemented by interaction techniques that support data exploration by aggregation, filtering, brushing, and selective data zooming. Furthermore, we formalize graph patterns so that they can be interactively highlighted on demand. A case study on software releases explores the evolution of call graphs extracted from the JUnit open source software project. In a second application, we demonstrate the scalability of our approach by applying it to a bibliography dataset containing more than 1.5 million paper titles from 60 years of research history producing a vast amount of relations between title words.
infovis-2011-18	Divided Edge Bundling for Directional Network Data. The node-link diagram is an intuitive and venerable way to depict a graph. To reduce clutter and improve the readability of node-link views, Holten & van Wijk's force-directed edge bundling employs a physical simulation to spatially group graph edges. While both useful and aesthetic, this technique has shortcomings: it bundles spatially proximal edges regardless of direction, weight, or graph connectivity. As a result, high-level directional edge patterns are obscured. We present divided edge bundling to tackle these shortcomings. By modifying the forces in the physical simulation, directional lanes appear as an emergent property of edge direction. By considering graph topology, we only bundle edges related by graph structure. Finally, we aggregate edge weights in bundles to enable more accurate visualization of total bundle weights. We compare visualizations created using our technique to standard force-directed edge bundling, matrix diagrams, and clustered graphs; we find that divided edge bundling leads to visualizations that are easier to interpret and reveal both familiar and previously obscured patterns.
infovis-2011-19	Skeleton-Based Edge Bundling for Graph Visualization. In this paper, we present a novel approach for constructing bundled layouts of general graphs. As layout cues for bundles, we use medial axes, or skeletons, of edges which are similar in terms of position information. We combine edge clustering, distance fields, and 2D skeletonization to construct progressively bundled layouts for general graphs by iteratively attracting edges towards the centerlines of level sets of their distance fields. Apart from clustering, our entire pipeline is image-based with an efficient implementation in graphics hardware. Besides speed and implementation simplicity, our method allows explicit control of the emphasis on structure of the bundled layout, i.e. the creation of strongly branching (organic-like) or smooth bundles. We demonstrate our method on several large real-world graphs.
infovis-2011-20	BirdVis: Visualizing and Understanding Bird Populations. Birds are unrivaled windows into biotic processes at all levels and are proven indicators of ecological well-being. Understanding the determinants of species distributions and their dynamics is an important aspect of ecology and is critical for conservation and management. Through crowdsourcing, since 2002, the eBird project has been collecting bird observation records. These observations, together with local-scale environmental covariates such as climate, habitat, and vegetation phenology have been a valuable resource for a global community of educators, land managers, ornithologists, and conservation biologists. By associating environmental inputs with observed patterns of bird occurrence, predictive models have been developed that provide a statistical framework to harness available data for predicting species distributions and making inferences about species-habitat associations. Understanding these models, however, is challenging because they require scientists to quantify and compare multiscale spatialtemporal patterns. A large series of coordinated or sequential plots must be generated, individually programmed, and manually composed for analysis. This hampers the exploration and is a barrier to making the cross-species comparisons that are essential for coordinating conservation and extracting important ecological information. To address these limitations, as part of a collaboration among computer scientists, statisticians, biologists and ornithologists, we have developed BirdVis, an interactive visualization system that supports the analysis of spatio-temporal bird distribution models. BirdVis leverages visualization techniques and uses them in a novel way to better assist users in the exploration of interdependencies among model parameters. Furthermore, the system allows for comparative visualization through coordinated views, providing an intuitive interface to identify relevant correlations and patterns. We justify our design decisions and present case studies that show how BirdVis has helped scientists obtain new evidence for existing hypotheses, as well as formulate new hypotheses in their domain.
infovis-2011-21	BallotMaps: Detecting Name Bias in Alphabetically Ordered Ballot Papers. The relationship between candidates' position on a ballot paper and vote rank is explored in the case of 5000 candidates for the UK 2010 local government elections in the Greater London area. This design study uses hierarchical spatially arranged graphics to represent two locations that affect candidates at very different scales: the geographical areas for which they seek election and the spatial location of their names on the ballot paper. This approach allows the effect of position bias to be assessed; that is, the degree to which the position of a candidate's name on the ballot paper influences the number of votes received by the candidate, and whether this varies geographically. Results show that position bias was significant enough to influence rank order of candidates, and in the case of many marginal electoral wards, to influence who was elected to government. Position bias was observed most strongly for Liberal Democrat candidates but present for all major political parties. Visual analysis of classification of candidate names by ethnicity suggests that this too had an effect on votes received by candidates, in some cases overcoming alphabetic name bias. The results found contradict some earlier research suggesting that alphabetic name bias was not sufficiently significant to affect electoral outcome and add new evidence for the geographic and ethnicity influences on voting behaviour. The visual approach proposed here can be applied to a wider range of electoral data and the patterns identified and hypotheses derived from them could have significant implications for the design of ballot papers and the conduct of fair elections.
infovis-2011-22	Sequence Surveyor: Leveraging Overview for Scalable Genomic Alignment Visualization. In this paper, we introduce overview visualization tools for large-scale multiple genome alignment data. Genome alignment visualization and, more generally, sequence alignment visualization are an important tool for understanding genomic sequence data. As sequencing techniques improve and more data become available, greater demand is being placed on visualization tools to scale to the size of these new datasets. When viewing such large data, we necessarily cannot convey details, rather we specifically design overview tools to help elucidate large-scale patterns. Perceptual science, signal processing theory, and generality provide a framework for the design of such visualizations that can scale well beyond current approaches. We present Sequence Surveyor, a prototype that embodies these ideas for scalable multiple whole-genome alignment overview visualization. Sequence Surveyor visualizes sequences in parallel, displaying data using variable color, position, and aggregation encodings. We demonstrate how perceptual science can inform the design of visualization techniques that remain visually manageable at scale and how signal processing concepts can inform aggregation schemes that highlight global trends, outliers, and overall data distributions as the problem scales. These techniques allow us to visualize alignments with over 100 whole bacterial-sized genomes.
infovis-2011-23	Visualization of Parameter Space for Image Analysis. Image analysis algorithms are often highly parameterized and much human input is needed to optimize parameter settings. This incurs a time cost of up to several days. We analyze and characterize the conventional parameter optimization process for image analysis and formulate user requirements. With this as input, we propose a change in paradigm by optimizing parameters based on parameter sampling and interactive visual exploration. To save time and reduce memory load, users are only involved in the first step - initialization of sampling - and the last step - visual analysis of output. This helps users to more thoroughly explore the parameter space and produce higher quality results. We describe a custom sampling plug-in we developed for CellProfiler - a popular biomedical image analysis framework. Our main focus is the development of an interactive visualization technique that enables users to analyze the relationships between sampled input parameters and corresponding output. We implemented this in a prototype called Paramorama. It provides users with a visual overview of parameters and their sampled values. User-defined areas of interest are presented in a structured way that includes image-based output and a novel layout algorithm. To find optimal parameter settings, users can tag high- and low-quality results to refine their search. We include two case studies to illustrate the utility of this approach.
infovis-2011-24	TextFlow: Towards Better Understanding of Evolving Topics in Text. Understanding how topics evolve in text data is an important and challenging task. Although much work has been devoted to topic analysis, the study of topic evolution has largely been limited to individual topics. In this paper, we introduce TextFlow, a seamless integration of visualization and topic mining techniques, for analyzing various evolution patterns that emerge from multiple topics. We first extend an existing analysis technique to extract three-level features: the topic evolution trend, the critical event, and the keyword correlation. Then a coherent visualization that consists of three new visual components is designed to convey complex relationships between them. Through interaction, the topic mining model and visualization can communicate with each other to help users refine the analysis result and gain insights into the data progressively. Finally, two case studies are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and usefulness of TextFlow in helping users understand the major topic evolution patterns in time-varying text data.
infovis-2011-25	Exploratory Analysis of Time-series with ChronoLenses. Visual representations of time-series are useful for tasks such as identifying trends, patterns and anomalies in the data. Many techniques have been devised to make these visual representations more scalable, enabling the simultaneous display of multiple variables, as well as the multi-scale display of time-series of very high resolution or that span long time periods. There has been comparatively little research on how to support the more elaborate tasks associated with the exploratory visual analysis of timeseries, e.g., visualizing derived values, identifying correlations, or discovering anomalies beyond obvious outliers. Such tasks typically require deriving new time-series from the original data, trying different functions and parameters in an iterative manner. We introduce a novel visualization technique called ChronoLenses, aimed at supporting users in such exploratory tasks. ChronoLenses perform on-the-fly transformation of the data points in their focus area, tightly integrating visual analysis with user actions, and enabling the progressive construction of advanced visual analysis pipelines.
infovis-2011-26	CloudLines: Compact Display of Event Episodes in Multiple Time-Series. We propose incremental time-series visualization technique with interactive distortion as a way to deal with time-based representations of large and dynamic event data sets in limited space. Modern data analysis challenges in the domains of news publishing, network security and financial services require scalable solutions that will help the users to analyze the event data on atomic level while retaining the temporal context. The incremental nature of the data implies that visualizations have to necessarily change their content and still provide comprehensible representations. In this paper, we deal with the need to keep an eye on recent events together with providing a context on the past and making relevant patterns accessible at any scale. Our method adapts to the incoming data by using a decay function to let the items fade away according to their relevance. Since access to details is also important, we also provide a magnifying lens technique which takes into account the distortions introduced by the logarithmic time scale to enhance readability in selected areas of interest. We demonstrate the validity of our techniques by applying them on incremental data coming from online news streams in different time frames.
infovis-2011-27	Evaluation of Traditional, Orthogonal, and Radial Tree Diagrams by an Eye Tracking Study. Node-link diagrams are an effective and popular visualization approach for depicting hierarchical structures and for showing parent-child relationships. In this paper, we present the results of an eye tracking experiment investigating traditional, orthogonal, and radial node-link tree layouts as a piece of empirical basis for choosing between those layouts. Eye tracking was used to identify visual exploration behaviors of participants that were asked to solve a typical hierarchy exploration task by inspecting a static tree diagram: finding the least common ancestor of a given set of marked leaf nodes. To uncover exploration strategies, we examined fixation points, duration, and saccades of participants' gaze trajectories. For the non-radial diagrams, we additionally investigated the effect of diagram orientation by switching the position of the root node to each of the four main orientations. We also recorded and analyzed correctness of answers as well as completion times in addition to the eye movement data. We found out that traditional and orthogonal tree layouts significantly outperform radial tree layouts for the given task. Furthermore, by applying trajectory analysis techniques we uncovered that participants cross-checked their task solution more often in the radial than in the non-radial layouts.
infovis-2011-28	TreeNetViz: Revealing Patterns of Networks over Tree Structures. Network data often contain important attributes from various dimensions such as social affiliations and areas of expertise in a social network. If such attributes exhibit a tree structure, visualizing a compound graph consisting of tree and network structures becomes complicated. How to visually reveal patterns of a network over a tree has not been fully studied. In this paper, we propose a compound graph model, TreeNet, to support visualization and analysis of a network at multiple levels of aggregation over a tree. We also present a visualization design, TreeNetViz, to offer the multiscale and cross-scale exploration and interaction of a TreeNet graph. TreeNetViz uses a Radial, Space-Filling (RSF) visualization to represent the tree structure, a circle layout with novel optimization to show aggregated networks derived from TreeNet, and an edge bundling technique to reduce visual complexity. Our circular layout algorithm reduces both total edge-crossings and edge length and also considers hierarchical structure constraints and edge weight in a TreeNet graph. These experiments illustrate that the algorithm can reduce visual cluttering in TreeNet graphs. Our case study also shows that TreeNetViz has the potential to support the analysis of a compound graph by revealing multiscale and cross-scale network patterns.
infovis-2011-29	Improved Similarity Trees and their Application to Visual Data Classification. An alternative form to multidimensional projections for the visual analysis of data represented in multidimensional spaces is the deployment of similarity trees, such as Neighbor Joining trees. They organize data objects on the visual plane emphasizing their levels of similarity with high capability of detecting and separating groups and subgroups of objects. Besides this similarity-based hierarchical data organization, some of their advantages include the ability to decrease point clutter; high precision; and a consistent view of the data set during focusing, offering a very intuitive way to view the general structure of the data set as well as to drill down to groups and subgroups of interest. Disadvantages of similarity trees based on neighbor joining strategies include their computational cost and the presence of virtual nodes that utilize too much of the visual space. This paper presents a highly improved version of the similarity tree technique. The improvements in the technique are given by two procedures. The first is a strategy that replaces virtual nodes by promoting real leaf nodes to their place, saving large portions of space in the display and maintaining the expressiveness and precision of the technique. The second improvement is an implementation that significantly accelerates the algorithm, impacting its use for larger data sets. We also illustrate the applicability of the technique in visual data mining, showing its advantages to support visual classification of data sets, with special attention to the case of image classification. We demonstrate the capabilities of the tree for analysis and iterative manipulation and employ those capabilities to support evolving to a satisfactory data organization and classification.
infovis-2011-30	A Study on Dual-Scale Data Charts. We present the results of a user study that compares different ways of representing Dual-Scale data charts. Dual- Scale charts incorporate two different data resolutions into one chart in order to emphasize data in regions of interest or to enable the comparison of data from distant regions. While some design guidelines exist for these types of charts, there is currently little empirical evidence on which to base their design. We fill this gap by discussing the design space of Dual-Scale cartesian-coordinate charts and by experimentally comparing the performance of different chart types with respect to elementary graphical perception tasks such as comparing lengths and distances. Our study suggests that cut-out charts which include collocated full context and focus are the best alternative, and that superimposed charts in which focus and context overlap on top of each other should be avoided.
infovis-2011-31	Evaluation of Artery Visualizations for Heart Disease Diagnosis. Heart disease is the number one killer in the United States, and finding indicators of the disease at an early stage is critical for treatment and prevention. In this paper we evaluate visualization techniques that enable the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. A key physical quantity of medical interest is endothelial shear stress (ESS). Low ESS has been associated with sites of lesion formation and rapid progression of disease in the coronary arteries. Having effective visualizations of a patients ESS data is vital for the quick and thorough non-invasive evaluation by a cardiologist. We present a task taxonomy for hemodynamics based on a formative user study with domain experts. Based on the results of this study we developed HemoVis, an interactive visualization application for heart disease diagnosis that uses a novel 2D tree diagram representation of coronary artery trees. We present the results of a formal quantitative user study with domain experts that evaluates the effect of 2D versus 3D artery representations and of color maps on identifying regions of low ESS. We show statistically significant results demonstrating that our 2D visualizations are more accurate and efficient than 3D representations, and that a perceptually appropriate color map leads to fewer diagnostic mistakes than a rainbow color map.
infovis-2011-32	Exploring Ambient and Artistic Visualization for Residential Energy Use Feedback. Providing effective feedback on resource consumption in the home is a key challenge of environmental conservation efforts. One promising approach for providing feedback about residential energy consumption is the use of ambient and artistic visualizations. Pervasive computing technologies enable the integration of such feedback into the home in the form of distributed point-of-consumption feedback devices to support decision-making in everyday activities. However, introducing these devices into the home requires sensitivity to the domestic context. In this paper we describe three abstract visualizations and suggest four design requirements that this type of device must meet to be effective: pragmatic, aesthetic, ambient, and ecological. We report on the findings from a mixed methods user study that explores the viability of using ambient and artistic feedback in the home based on these requirements. Our findings suggest that this approach is a viable way to provide resource use feedback and that both the aesthetics of the representation and the context of use are important elements that must be considered in this design space.
infovis-2011-33	Human-Centered Approaches in Geovisualization Design: Investigating Multiple Methods Through a Long-Term Case Study. Working with three domain specialists we investigate human-centered approaches to geovisualization following an ISO13407 taxonomy covering context of use, requirements and early stages of design. Our case study, undertaken over three years, draws attention to repeating trends: that generic approaches fail to elicit adequate requirements for geovis application design; that the use of real data is key to understanding needs and possibilities; that trust and knowledge must be built and developed with collaborators. These processes take time but modified human-centred approaches can be effective. A scenario developed through contextual inquiry but supplemented with domain data and graphics is useful to geovis designers. Wireframe, paper and digital prototypes enable successful communication between specialist and geovis domains when incorporating real and interesting data, prompting exploratory behaviour and eliciting previously unconsidered requirements. Paper prototypes are particularly successful at eliciting suggestions, especially for novel visualization. Enabling specialists to explore their data freely with a digital prototype is as effective as using a structured task protocol and is easier to administer. Autoethnography has potential for framing the design process. We conclude that a common understanding of context of use, domain data and visualization possibilities are essential to successful geovis design and develop as this progresses. HC approaches can make a significant contribution here. However, modified approaches, applied with flexibility, are most promising. We advise early, collaborative engagement with data &#8211; through simple, transient visual artefacts supported by data sketches and existing designs &#8211; before moving to successively more sophisticated data wireframes and data prototypes.
infovis-2011-34	Visual Thinking In Action: Visualizations As Used On Whiteboards. While it is still most common for information visualization researchers to develop new visualizations from a data- or taskdriven perspective, there is growing interest in understanding the types of visualizations people create by themselves for personal use. As part of this recent direction, we have studied a large collection of whiteboards in a research institution, where people make active use of combinations of words, diagrams and various types of visuals to help them further their thought processes. Our goal is to arrive at a better understanding of the nature of visuals that are created spontaneously during brainstorming, thinking, communicating, and general problem solving on whiteboards. We use the qualitative approaches of open coding, interviewing, and affinity diagramming to explore the use of recognizable and novel visuals, and the interplay between visualization and diagrammatic elements with words, numbers and labels. We discuss the potential implications of our findings on information visualization design.
infovis-2011-35	Composite Density Maps for Multivariate Trajectories. We consider moving objects as multivariate time-series. By visually analyzing the attributes, patterns may appear that explain why certain movements have occurred. Density maps as proposed by Scheepens et al. [25] are a way to reveal these patterns by means of aggregations of filtered subsets of trajectories. Since filtering is often not sufficient for analysts to express their domain knowledge, we propose to use expressions instead. We present a flexible architecture for density maps to enable custom, versatile exploration using multiple density fields. The flexibility comes from a script, depicted in this paper as a block diagram, which defines an advanced computation of a density field. We define six different types of blocks to create, compose, and enhance trajectories or density fields. Blocks are customized by means of expressions that allow the analyst to model domain knowledge. The versatility of our architecture is demonstrated with several maritime use cases developed with domain experts. Our approach is expected to be useful for the analysis of objects in other domains.
infovis-2011-36	Focus+Context Metro Maps. We introduce a focus+context method to visualize a complicated metro map of a modern city on a small displaying area. The context of our work is with regard the popularity of mobile devices. The best route to the destination, which can be obtained from the arrival time of trains, is highlighted. The stations on the route enjoy larger spaces, whereas the other stations are rendered smaller and closer to fit the whole map into a screen. To simplify the navigation and route planning for visitors, we formulate various map characteristics such as octilinear transportation lines and regular station distances into energy terms. We then solve for the optimal layout in a least squares sense. In addition, we label the names of stations that are on the route of a passenger according to human preferences, occlusions, and consistencies of label positions using the graph cuts method. Our system achieves real-time performance by being able to report instant information because of the carefully designed energy terms. We apply our method to layout a number of metro maps and show the results and timing statistics to demonstrate the feasibility of our technique.
infovis-2011-37	Flow Map Layout via Spiral Trees. Flow maps are thematic maps that visualize the movement of objects, such as people or goods, between geographic regions. One or more sources are connected to several targets by lines whose thickness corresponds to the amount of flow between a source and a target. Good flow maps reduce visual clutter by merging (bundling) lines smoothly and by avoiding self-intersections. Most flow maps are still drawn by hand and only few automated methods exist. Some of the known algorithms do not support edgebundling and those that do, cannot guarantee crossing-free flows. We present a new algorithmic method that uses edge-bundling and computes crossing-free flows of high visual quality. Our method is based on so-called spiral trees, a novel type of Steiner tree which uses logarithmic spirals. Spiral trees naturally induce a clustering on the targets and smoothly bundle lines. Our flows can also avoid obstacles, such as map features, region outlines, or even the targets. We demonstrate our approach with extensive experiments.
infovis-2011-38	Exploring Uncertainty in Geodemographics with Interactive Graphics. Geodemographic classifiers characterise populations by categorising geographical areas according to the demographic and lifestyle characteristics of those who live within them. The dimension-reducing quality of such classifiers provides a simple and effective means of characterising population through a manageable set of categories, but inevitably hides heterogeneity, which varies within and between the demographic categories and geographical areas, sometimes systematically. This may have implications for their use, which is widespread in government and commerce for planning, marketing and related activities. We use novel interactive graphics to delve into OAC &#8211; a free and open geodemographic classifier that classifies the UK population in over 200,000 small geographical areas into 7 super-groups, 21 groups and 52 sub-groups. Our graphics provide access to the original 41 demographic variables used in the classification and the uncertainty associated with the classification of each geographical area on-demand. It also supports comparison geographically and by category. This serves the dual purpose of helping understand the classifier itself leading to its more informed use and providing a more comprehensive view of population in a comprehensible manner. We assess the impact of these interactive graphics on experienced OAC users who explored the details of the classification, its uncertainty and the nature of between &#8211; and within &#8211; class variation and then reflect on their experiences. Visualization of the complexities and subtleties of the classification proved to be a thought-provoking exercise both confirming and challenging users' understanding of population, the OAC classifier and the way it is used in their organisations. Users identified three contexts for which the techniques were deemed useful in the context of local government, confirming the validity of the proposed methods.
infovis-2011-39	Drawing Road Networks with Focus Regions. Mobile users of maps typically need detailed information about their surroundings plus some context information about remote places. In order to avoid that the map partly gets too dense, cartographers have designed mapping functions that enlarge a user-defined focus region - such functions are sometimes called fish-eye projections. The extra map space occupied by the enlarged focus region is compensated by distorting other parts of the map. We argue that, in a map showing a network of roads relevant to the user, distortion should preferably take place in those areas where the network is sparse. Therefore, we do not apply a predefined mapping function. Instead, we consider the road network as a graph whose edges are the road segments. We compute a new spatial mapping with a graph-based optimization approach, minimizing the square sum of distortions at edges. Our optimization method is based on a convex quadratic program (CQP); CQPs can be solved in polynomial time. Important requirements on the output map are expressed as linear inequalities. In particular, we show how to forbid edge crossings. We have implemented our method in a prototype tool. For instances of different sizes, our method generated output maps that were far less distorted than those generated with a predefined fish-eye projection. Future work is needed to automate the selection of roads relevant to the user. Furthermore, we aim at fast heuristics for application in real-time systems.
infovis-2011-40	Local Affine Multidimensional Projection. Multidimensional projection techniques have experienced many improvements lately, mainly regarding computational times and accuracy. However, existing methods do not yet provide flexible enough mechanisms for visualization-oriented fully interactive applications. This work presents a new multidimensional projection technique designed to be more flexible and versatile than other methods. This novel approach, called Local Affine Multidimensional Projection (LAMP), relies on orthogonal mapping theory to build accurate local transformations that can be dynamically modified according to user knowledge. The accuracy, flexibility and computational efficiency of LAMP is confirmed by a comprehensive set of comparisons. LAMP's versatility is exploited in an application which seeks to correlate data that, in principle, has no connection as well as in visual exploration of textual documents.
infovis-2011-41	Angular Histograms: Frequency-Based Visualizations for Large, High Dimensional Data. Parallel coordinates is a popular and well-known multivariate data visualization technique. However, one of their inherent limitations has to do with the rendering of very large data sets. This often causes an overplotting problem and the goal of the visual information seeking mantra is hampered because of a cluttered overview and non-interactive update rates. In this paper, we propose two novel solutions, namely, angular histograms and attribute curves. These techniques are frequency-based approaches to large, high-dimensional data visualization. They are able to convey both the density of underlying polylines and their slopes. Angular histogram and attribute curves offer an intuitive way for the user to explore the clustering, linear correlations and outliers in large data sets without the over-plotting and clutter problems associated with traditional parallel coordinates. We demonstrate the results on a wide variety of data sets including real-world, high-dimensional biological data. Finally, we compare our methods with the other popular frequency-based algorithms.
infovis-2011-42	DICON: Interactive Visual Analysis of Multidimensional Clusters. Clustering as a fundamental data analysis technique has been widely used in many analytic applications. However, it is often difficult for users to understand and evaluate multidimensional clustering results, especially the quality of clusters and their semantics. For large and complex data, high-level statistical information about the clusters is often needed for users to evaluate cluster quality while a detailed display of multidimensional attributes of the data is necessary to understand the meaning of clusters. In this paper, we introduce DICON, an icon-based cluster visualization that embeds statistical information into a multi-attribute display to facilitate cluster interpretation, evaluation, and comparison. We design a treemap-like icon to represent a multidimensional cluster, and the quality of the cluster can be conveniently evaluated with the embedded statistical information. We further develop a novel layout algorithm which can generate similar icons for similar clusters, making comparisons of clusters easier. User interaction and clutter reduction are integrated into the system to help users more effectively analyze and refine clustering results for large datasets. We demonstrate the power of DICON through a user study and a case study in the healthcare domain. Our evaluation shows the benefits of the technique, especially in support of complex multidimensional cluster analysis.
infovis-2011-43	Brushing Dimensions -- A Dual Visual Analysis Model for High-dimensional Data. In many application fields, data analysts have to deal with datasets that contain many expressions per item. The effective analysis of such multivariate datasets is dependent on the users ability to understand both the intrinsic dimensionality of the dataset as well as the distribution of the dependent values with respect to the dimensions. In this paper, we propose a visualization model that enables the joint interactive visual analysis of multivariate datasets with respect to their dimensions as well as with respect to the actual data values. We describe a dual setting of visualization and interaction in items space and in dimensions space. The visualization of items is linked to the visualization of dimensions with brushing and focus+context visualization. With this approach, the user is able to jointly study the structure of the dimensions space as well as the distribution of data items with respect to the dimensions. Even though the proposed visualization model is general, we demonstrate its application in the context of a DNA microarray data analysis.
infovis-2011-44	MoleView: An Attribute and Structure-based Semantic Lens for Large Element-based Plots. We present MoleView, a novel technique for interactive exploration of multivariate relational data. Given a spatial embedding of the data, in terms of a scatter plot or graph layout, we propose a semantic lens which selects a specific spatial and attribute-related data range. The lens keeps the selected data in focus unchanged and continuously deforms the data out of the selection range in order to maintain the context around the focus. Specific deformations include distance-based repulsion of scatter plot points, deforming straight-line node-link graph drawings, and as varying the simplification degree of bundled edge graph layouts. Using a brushing-based technique, we further show the applicability of our semantic lens for scenarios requiring a complex selection of the zones of interest. Our technique is simple to implement and provides real-time performance on large datasets. We demonstrate our technique with actual data from air and road traffic control, medical imaging, and software comprehension applications.
